JCLAAnderson                                                          Judy D. Olian.
                                                                       Dean and John L. Anderson Chair in Management
    Scliotilof MiiiiiiKcim-ni
                                                                      Tel (310) 825-7982 Fax (310) 206-2073
                                                                       judy.olian@anderson.ucla.edu




    John Wooden is a monumental figure in American sports, yet his legacy of leadership transcends
    athletics and spans generations. Coach Wooden instills in others a sense of pride, a
    commitment to ethics and a respect for teamwork. These fundamental principles translate
    readily from the sports arena to business, management and leadership.

    The UCLA Anderson School of Management is privileged to partner with the Coach in creating
    the John Wooden Global Leadership Program, based upon his fundamental principles. We
    established this program because Coach Wooden's philosophy and methodology of leadership
    and team building - character-based, practical, and values driven - are as relevant and
    applicable today, as ever. We are proud to partner with Coach Wooden in creating an academic
    home for his teachings on leadership and management.

    Although John Wooden gained fame at UCLA as an illustrious basketball coach, his leadership
    values, professional and personal behavior are as applicable in business. Team building in any
    context - especially in today's hyper-competitive and fast changing environment - is difficult.
    That Coach Wooden was able to achieve such consistent successes at the highest levels over his
    forty year career is a tribute to the robustness of his ideas.

    A significant component of this new program was the inauguration of the UCLA Anderson /John
    Wooden Global Leadership Award, which will be given annually to an outstanding individual
    who reflects the leadership values personified by Coach Wooden. In 2008, Howard Schultz,
    Chairman and CEO of Starbucks, received the first JWGL Award. In future years, UCLA Anderson
    will continue to celebrate the best in leadership. The John Wooden Global Leadership Program
    is an important ingredient of that overarching goal.

    We are also very pleased that Steve Jamison, Coach Wooden's longtime collaborator and author
    on the coach's leadership philosophy, will serve as a consultant to the UCLA Anderson / John
    Wooden Global Leadership Program.




    Judy D. Olian
    Dean and John E. Anderson Chair in Management




   110 Westwood Plaza, Mullin Management Commons
   Suite F407, Box 951481, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
   www.anderson.ucla.edu
This page intentionally left blank
COACH
WOODEN’S
 LEADERSHIP
  GAME PLAN
 FOR SUCCESS
 12 Lessons for Extraordinary
      Performance and
     Personal Excellence

  JOHN WOODEN
AND STEVE JAMISON

             McGraw-Hill
        New York Chicago San Francisco
  Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City Milan
      New Delhi San Juan Seoul Singapore
                Sydney Toronto
Copyright © 2009 by John Wooden and Steve Jamison. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the
United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any
form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of
the publisher.

ISBN: 978-0-07-162690-3

MHID: 0-07-162690-5

The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-162614-9, MHID:
0-07-162614-X.

All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every
occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the
trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in
this book, they have been printed with initial caps.

McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promo-
tions,or for use in corporate training programs. To contact a representative please e-mail us at bul
sales@mcgraw-hill.com.

Photocredits

Title page: ©Sports Illustrated/ Getty images pp. xvi, 10 (right), 16 Purdue Sports Information Office/Special
Collection Library (Elmer Reynolds) pp. 26, 118 Indiana State University Archives, Athletic Photograph
Collection pp. 1, 27, 29, 35, 71, 101, 103, 108, 112, 125, 129, 134, 138, 143, 152, 191, 213, 223 ASUCLA
p. 121, 148 South Bend Tribune p. 273 Uncle Roy Stark

TERMS OF USE

This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors
reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under
the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decom-
pile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit,
distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s prior
consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work
is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.

THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARAN-
TEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR
RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT
CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESS-
LY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will
meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor
its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause,
in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of
any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its
licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that
result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility
of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such
claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
To Nell, whose love and support throughout these years
has been my strength. And Nan and Jim whose strength
        through these years has been their love.
                   —John Wooden




        To Mary and Ev Edstrom, my parents.
    And to Coach Wooden, my teacher and friend.
                   —Steve Jamison
This page intentionally left blank
              Contents


  Greetings from Coach John Wooden                 ix

  Biography                                      xiii

  Preface by Steve Jamison                        xv

  Acknowledgments                               xxiii


PART   I

  ORIGINS OF LEADERSHIP:
  A COMPASS FOR CORE VALUES                        1


PART   II

  THE PYRA MID OF SUCCESS                         29


PART   III

  12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP                      101


PART   IV

  REFLECTIONS ON LEADERSHIP                     193


PART   V

  A L E A DE RS H I P R E A L I T Y C H E C K   215


PART   VI

  WOODEN’S TEA M                                225


  About Steve Jamison                           275
This page intentionally left blank
                  Greetings
        from Coach John Wooden




           Whether your team has talent to spare
            or is spare on talent, a leader’s goal
      remains the same; namely, you must bring forth
         the best from those with whom you work.


Most leaders deﬁne winning as beating an op-
ponent, gaining supremacy over the competi-
tion in the marketplace, achieving production
or sales goals.
    For any of these objectives to be met, tal-
ent must be present within your organization.
A leader can’t create a competitive team out
of nothing; no coach can win consistently,
                                                       When you’re
and no leader can prevail in the marketplace
                                                     through learning,
without good material.
                                                     you’re through.
    However, while you need talent to win,
many leaders don’t know how to win even
with talent in their organization. Furthermore, we are fre-
quently forced to compete when the talent match-up isn’t in
our favor. What then?


                                                                     ix
GREETINGS FROM COACH JOHN WOODEN




             Over and over I have taught that we all have a certain
         potential, unique to each one of us. A unique potential also
         exists for every team. My responsibility as a leader—and
         yours—is to make the utmost effort to bring forth that po-
         tential. When this occurs, you have achieved success. Then,
         perhaps when circumstances come together, we may find
         that we are very competitive, perhaps even number 1.
             It is my belief that when this occurs—being number 1,
         winning—it is simply a by-product of leadership that knows
         how to get the most out of a team that is very talented.
         Thus, for me the highest standard is success—the knowl-
         edge that you have made the effort to teach your team how
         to work together at their highest level.
             And that, in my opinion, is the ﬁrst goal of leadership—
         namely, getting the very best out of the people in your or-
         ganization, whether they have talent to spare or are spare
         on talent.
             Coach Wooden’s Leadership Game Plan for Success
         seeks to offer details of how I went about bringing forth my
         own potential and that of our teams—striving to reach an
         uppermost level of our competency.
             In some seasons the teams I taught were blessed with
         signiﬁcant ability. Other years this was not the case. But in
         all years and with all levels of talent, my goal remained ex-
         actly the same, namely, to get the most out of what we had.
             What I teach has stood me in good stead during nearly a
         half century in the competitive arena, and in spite of all of


  x
                                   GREETINGS FROM COACH JOHN WOODEN




the changes we see around us, I believe it can be equally ef-
fective in the twenty-first century. Why? Because in many
ways, the more things change, the more they stay the same.
   And one of the things that has stayed the same is people—
human nature hasn’t changed.




                                                                xi
This page intentionally left blank
              Biography


John Wooden strides across twentieth-century sports in Amer-
ica in a singular manner—a preeminent and most revered
coach, teacher, and leader. His UCLA basketball dynasty
won 10 national March Madness championships, including
seven in consecutive years. Under his leadership the UCLA
Bruins had four perfect seasons and set the all-time record
for consecutive victories: 88. Experts generally agree these
records will stand forever.
    The UCLA teams won 38 straight playoff          The past is for
games (a record) and appeared in the Final Four      reference; the
12 times during a 14-year period (a record).           future for
    During his 40-year coaching career, John        dreamers. The
Wooden had one losing season, his first.           present moment
He taught at Dayton High School in Ken-              is where you
tucky for 2 years; South Bend Central High          create success:
School for 9 years; Indiana State Teachers             make it a
College for 2 years; UCLA for 27 years. Dur-         masterpiece.
ing that time his teams won over 80 percent
of their games.
    As a student-athlete at Purdue University, John Wooden
was the nation’s ﬁrst three-time, all-consensus, All Ameri-
can and led the Boilermakers to a national championship.


                                                                      xiii
BIOGRAPHY




            Upon graduation from Purdue in 1932, the university pres-
            ident, Edward Elliot, awarded him the Big Ten Medal for
            Scholastic and Athletic Prowess.




               Mr. Wooden was selected by ESPN as “The Greatest
            Coach of the 20th Century.” In 2003 he received the na-
            tion’s highest civilian honor, the Medal of Freedom Award,
            in ceremonies at the White House. According to Sports Il-
            lustrated, “There’s never been a finer coach in American
            sports than John Wooden. Nor a ﬁner man.”
               In 2008 the prestigious UCLA Anderson School of Man-
            agement established the John Wooden Global Leadership
            Program. In coming years, the school will serve as the aca-
            demic home for sharing the principles of Mr. Wooden’s phi-
            losophy and methodology of leadership.


xiv
                     PREFACE
                    by Steve Ja mison




Coach Wooden’s Leadership Game Plan for Success is a re-
sponse to the great interest in and acceptance by the business
community and academic world of two earlier publications:
Wooden on Leadership (McGraw-Hill) and The Essential
Wooden (McGraw-Hill). Those bestsellers introduced John
Wooden’s leadership concepts to a new and large corporate
audience in America. Here we extend his teaching on lead-
ership and offer a commonsense approach to understand-
ing and incorporating his concepts.
    The great coach, now 98 years old, reminds us that
when it comes to leadership, teaching, and coaching there
is no one right way, or “only way,” but many ways. He of-
fers his own lessons from his own experience with that in
mind as well as the hope that you’ll ﬁnd some observations
and directions that lend themselves to bringing out your
best as a leader.
    In large part John Wooden is self-taught. When he was
coming up as a young man, there were no graduate courses
in leadership, no gurus of management, no large section at
the bookstore titled “Leadership and Management.” You
basically had to ﬁgure it out for yourself. And he did.


                                                                 xv
PREFACE




              I believe to a large degree this still holds true. You have
          to pay attention to what’s going on; you have to be a good
          listener and learner. As you’ll see here, John Wooden was an
          astute listener and a voracious learner.
              In the process he became an historic leader.
              Just as John Wooden took the words and deeds of his fa-
          ther and mentors in new directions with creative applications,
          he hopes you will do the same with his body of teaching.
              We’ve included questions that call for reﬂection and the
          creation of some straightforward steps on your part, but
          that’s just to prime your pump. The real evaluation, intro-
          spection, and application of this book’s substance in your
          leadership is up to you. The most important questions, the
          most valuable tasks you design as derived from Coach
          Wooden’s philosophy and methodology will come from you.
              For many years many people thought of John Wooden
          as a teacher of basketball only. Since he stepped away from
          active coaching following UCLA’s tenth national champi-
          onship, his ideas and example have become increasingly
          revered and taught by others outside of sports.
              Most recently UCLA’s Anderson School of Management
          established the John Wooden Global Leadership Program
          to promulgate his leadership philosophy—character-based—
          in its graduate program.
              To paraphrase Ben Jonson’s description of William Shake-
          speare (one of Coach Wooden’s favorites), I would suggest
          the following: “The leadership concepts of John Wooden are


xvi
                                                                    PREFACE




not for an age, but for all time.” And, in the eyes of many,
including me, Coach Wooden is an all-time great leader.




   TEN THINGS I MOST RESPECT ABOUT
         JOHN WOODEN
   1. John Wooden broke the color barrier.
   In 1947 Coach Wooden’s Indiana State Teachers College
   basketball team—the Sycamores—was offered a berth in
   the N.A.I.A. basketball tournament, one of the nation’s ﬁrst
   prominent college play-off events. The tournament, like
   others, excluded African Americans.
       Clarence Walker, a nonstarter on the Sycamores
   team, was black. Without fanfare, John Wooden turned
   down the invitation because he refused to participate in
   segregation.
       The following year Coach Wooden’s team was again
   invited to play because of national attention being given
   his modern “racehorse” offense and the Sycamore’s 27-7
   record. Again, he turned down the invitation.
       In response, N.A.I.A. ofﬁcials quietly but quickly changed
   their racial policy and re-invited the Sycamores. This time
   Coach Wooden accepted and in the process broke the
   color barrier. Clarence Walker became the first black to
   play in a national basketball tournament for white colleges.




                                                                        xvii
 PREFACE




           2. Ten national championships didn’t change John
           Wooden.
           His historic achievements at UCLA—creating perhaps the
           greatest dynasty in sports history—did not turn John
           Wooden’s head. His tastes remained the same: favorite
           meal, Anderson’s pea soup; favorite apparel, a blue cardi-
           gan sweater; favorite part of his job, conducting practice
           with his players in the gymnasium. Other than sharpening
           his skills and broadening his knowledge, John Wooden re-
           mained the same man while the records were being set—
           and after—as before the sports nation knew his name.
           Somehow, fame did not change him.


           3. John Wooden treats people right.
           Whether you’re the boss or the busboy, a CEO or a secre-
           tary, John Wooden gives you his sincere attention. His fa-
           ther’s advice guides him: “Never believe you’re better than
           somebody else, Johnny, but always remember you’re just
           as good as anybody.” Just as good, but no better. In
           Coach’s view, until he sees otherwise, every person he
           meets deserves to be treated with respect. And he does.


           4. John Wooden practices “value-added” performance.
           When asked to work for an hour, Mr. Wooden stays longer.
           When asked to donate a dollar, he gives more. Throughout
           his life John Wooden has gone beyond the minimum daily




xviii
                                                               PREFACE




requirements both professionally and personally. He does the
job and then some. Although he believes it is impossible to
give more than 100 percent of oneself, he seems to do it.

5. John Wooden is savvy.
Over the decades he has become a keen student of human
nature and is quick to spot ulterior motives, hidden agen-
das, and all the rest. Behind his cordial demeanor is some-
one who won’t be fooled—with one caveat: Coach Wooden
believes, “It is better to trust and be disappointed occa-
sionally than to mistrust and be miserable all the time.” He
is comfortable being fooled on occasion if he gave his trust
to someone who subsequently let him down.

6. John Wooden remembers his roots.
He grew up on a little farm near a little town in the center
of America. John Wooden has never seen any reason to
act in a manner contrary to what he learned in Centerton,
Indiana. Manners matter, work counts, and when you say
you’ll do something you do it. Simple as that.

7. John Wooden is a master of pro
                                oductive criticism.
Being critical is a constant in coaching. John Wooden is a
master at criticizing in a manner that brings improvement
because he does not unintentionally create antagonism or
resentment in the process. This was possible, in part, be-
cause at all times with all players he never got personal,




                                                                   xix
PREFACE




          never extended speciﬁc criticism to a general rebuke of the
          individual. His criticism—often very sharp—did not create
          a “mess” that had to be cleaned up later. When the issue
          was addressed and fixed, it was over. Time to move on.
          No hard feelings.


          8. John Wooden is smart, in part, because he listens.
          A conversation with Coach Wooden may include subjects
          as diverse as the Fifth Amendment, international politics,
          Shakespeare, rule changes in NCAA Division I basketball,
          movie stars, and more. The key word: conversation. He
          enjoys talking; he enjoys listening just as much. Perhaps
          this is because of an observation by his dad, Joshua Hugh
          Wooden: “You’ll never know a thing that you didn’t learn
          from somebody else.” John Wooden knows you can’t
          learn from somebody else if you’re talking all the time.


          9. John Wooden measures himself by a radic
                                                   cal
          deﬁnition of success.
          One of the winningest championship coaches in American
          history, John Wooden has never deﬁned his ultimate suc-
          cess by victory. “Winning is very important,” he observes.
          “Why else would we keep score?” There is, however,
          something even more important, a standard higher than
          the score. Coach Wooden hews to a deﬁnition of success
          that he places above winning, namely, “making the effort—




 xx
                                                                PREFACE




100 percent—to become the best you are capable of be-
coming.” Few understand, but his standard of success is
more difﬁcult to achieve than merely winning. It is one of
the reasons John Wooden became such a big winner.

10. John Wooden loves and has always been true to
one woman.
“She was my sweetheart for 60 years and my dear wife for
53,” he tells us. Nellie was his partner—co-coach—in rais-
ing their family, his conﬁdant and one true love. When he
lost her on the ﬁrst day of spring, 1985, “I almost died from
grief.” Today he still grieves for his sweetheart.




                                                                    xxi
This page intentionally left blank
 Acknowledgments


The Authors wish to thank the following for their great
support:


       Dean Judy Olian: UCLA/Anderson School of
       Management

       Dr. Stephen Covey

       Dan Guerrero, Director of Athletics, UCLA

       Kim Edstrom: Executive Director: John Wooden
       Leadership Course

       Julie Winter

       Andy Serwer: Fortune; Managing Editor

       Rich Karlgaard: Forbes; Editor and Publisher

       Paul Asel and Wharton Leadership Digest

       McDonalds Corporation and McDonalds All
       American Games

       Bill Carlino: Editor-in-Chief; Accounting Today

       General Mills Corporation


                                                          xxiii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS




                  The 3 Amigos: Charlotte Bertling-Erland; John
                  Russett; Rue Patel

                  Jim Wooden

                  Nan Wooden Muehlhausen

                  Mary Jean Edstrom

                  Sophia’s Valley Inn

                  VIPs




xxiv
          PA R T   I



 origins of
 leadership
A COMPASS FOR
CORE VALUES
This page intentionally left blank
 The Origin of My Leadership



  My Compass For Core Values        |   by John Wooden


    he best man I’ve ever known is my fa-
T   ther, Joshua Hugh Wooden. He was also
my greatest teacher. What Dad taught me,
and how he taught it, had a most profound
impact on what I did professionally.
    In style and substance, much of what I
taught in 40 years as a leader and coach can
be traced back in some manner to his own
                                                           My dad
teaching, his own example back on our farm
                                                          Johnny,
in Centerton, Indiana.
                                                         never cease
    My father had a commonsense kind of
                                                          trying to
wisdom. A man of few words, when Joshua
                                                         be the best
Hugh Wooden said something, he really said
                                                         you can be.
something.
    Four of his important guiding principles
have been a compass for me in my years of teaching, impor-
tant words and deeds I have tried to live by and teach oth-
ers. Dad’s principles, the points on his compass, had to do
with ethics and attitude. I didn’t know it at the time, but he
was giving me what is at the core of strong leadership.


                                                                       3
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                     Try your hardest; make the effort; do your best.
                               a message repeated often
                               by Joshua Hugh Wooden.


            Ethics and Attitude

                       Be more concerned with your character than
               with your reputation. Character is what you really are.
                         Reputation is what people say you are.
                              Character is more important.


                             John Wooden’s leadership was “character-
      I am not what          based” before the word was invented. His phi-
      I ought to be,         losophy and methodology are grounded in
       Not what I            straightforward attitudes, values, and princi-
       want to be,           ples taught by his father, Joshua Hugh Wooden.
       Not what I            The genesis of John Wooden’s “character-
  am going to be,            based” leadership is traced back to what he
 But I’m thankful            learned growing up on a small farm in Cen-
        that I am            terton, Indiana, in the 1920s. Here are the four
      better than I          navigation points on John Wooden’s compass
       used to be.           for life and leadership that he learned from
                             his father:



                1. The Golden Rule

                According to John Wooden, “My father came as close
            to living the Golden Rule as anyone I have ever known.”


  4
                ORIGINS OF LEADERSHIP: A COMPASS FOR CORE VALUES




    The Wooden family farmhouse, Centerton, Indiana



      There is a choice you have to make in
everything you do. So keep in mind that in the end
         the choice you make makes you.




    Coach John Wooden, Dayton (KY) High School, 1932




                                                             5
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         The example of Joshua Hugh Wooden’s “living the Golden
         Rule” made a profound and lasting impression on the fu-
         ture teacher and coach. Consciously and unconsciously
         “treating others as you would have them treat you” became
         a near-inviolable tenet of John Wooden’s leadership. It is the
         first navigation point on his compass of character-based
         leadership.


             2. Dad’s Two Sets of Threes

             Joshua Hugh Wooden repeatedly reminded his four
         sons—Maurice (“Cat”), Johnny, Dan, and Bill—of his two
         lists (sets) with instructions offering directives on ethics and
         attitude. The ﬁrst set gave three instructions on integrity:


              1. Never lie.

              2. Never cheat.

              3. Never steal.


             The second set gave three suggestions on how to face
         adversity:


              1. Don’t whine.

              2. Don’t complain.

              3. Don’t make excuses.


  6
                     ORIGINS OF LEADERSHIP: A COMPASS FOR CORE VALUES




       Joshua Wooden and sons Billy, Dan, Johnny, and “Cat”



   Joshua Hugh Wooden’s Two Sets of Threes offer straight-
forward advice; simple to understand, not so simple to
abide by. They became the second navigation point on John
Wooden’s compass.



   3. The Caution against Comparisons

   Throughout his early years, the future coach was told
by his father to do the following when it came to the compe-
tition and comparing himself to others: “Johnny, don’t worry
about being better than somebody else, but never cease try-
ing to be the best you can be. You have control over that.
Not the other.” Eventually this advice would spur him to


                                                                  7
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                                  redefine success in a manner that was
  Strive to accomplish            radical. In the process, John Wooden
 the very best that you           largely freed himself from the judgment
        are capable of.           of outsiders. What mattered most was
       Nothing less than          not how he fared in comparison to oth-
      your best effort will       ers, but how close he came to his father’s
  sufﬁce. You may fool            advice: ceaseless effort in bringing forth
      others, but you can         his own potential. He allowed no one,
      never fool yourself.        not even the scoreboard, to tell him
  Self-satisfaction will          whether or not he had succeeded in
        come from the             achieving this. John Wooden became the
  knowledge that you              only judge of his success that mattered
 left no stone unturned           to John Wooden. It is the third naviga-
         in an effort to          tion point.
 accomplish everything
      possible under the
                                      4. Dad’s Seven-Point Creed
        circumstances.
                                      Upon graduation from a country school
             in Centerton, Indiana, John Wooden received a gift from his
             father: a two-dollar bill. More important, Joshua Hugh
             Wooden also gave his son a 3 x 5 card on which he had writ-
             ten what would become the fourth navigation point:


                             “Seven Suggestions to Follow”

                   1. Be true to yourself.

                   2. Help others.


  8
                     ORIGINS OF LEADERSHIP: A COMPASS FOR CORE VALUES




     3. Make each day your masterpiece.

     4. Drink deeply from good books—including the
        Good Book.

     5. Make friendship a ﬁne art.

     6. Build a shelter against a rainy day.

     7. Pray for guidance, count and give thanks for your
        blessings every day.



                     S U M M A R Y


John Wooden is frequently cited as an example of a values-
based leader, one whose positive and productive principles
were intrinsically woven into his system. What he did on the
court reﬂected who he was off the court. Who he was, and is, is
a direct reflection of the basic teachings of his father, Joshua
Hugh Wooden, and the compass he gave his son for navigat-
ing through life and leadership.




             The E volution of
              My Leadership

               Ability may get you to the top,
             but it takes character to stay there.


                                                                   9
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




           MY THREE GREAT MENTORS               |    by John Wooden


              hree mentors had a profound inﬂuence on my leader-
         T    ship in both style and substance. Each man contributed
         signiﬁcantly to what I embraced and taught as a coach.
             While my father provided the foundation for my philos-
         ophy, the compass for ethics and attitude, these three men-
         tors—all coaches—were crucial to its evolution. Obviously,
         I worked hard to improve my teaching as the years went on,
         increasing my self-control, patience, and more, but these
         men had a tremendous impact on what I taught and how I
         taught it.




             Earl Warriner            Glenn Curtis        Ward “Piggy” Lambert



                        Before you can be a good leader,
                             you must be a good follower.


 10
                    ORIGINS OF LEADERSHIP: A COMPASS FOR CORE VALUES




   Define the Star, Teach
 Details, E xtend Your Fa mily


Define the Star

   Earl Warriner: The Star of the Team
   Is the Team

   John Wooden attended Centerton Grade School—one
mile down a dirt road from the family farm. The principal
and basketball coach of the school, Mr. Earl Warriner, taught
one of the strongest lessons in team building that John
Wooden ever learned; namely, no single person is more im-
portant than the team.




A leader must accomplish the difﬁcult task of getting those
    on the team to believe that “we” supersedes “me.”


                                                                 11
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                               Who is the star of the team?



                 If a grade school basketball team could have a “star,”
            Joshua Hugh Wooden’s son Johnny was it; the “gunner”
                              more likely to make a basket than not.
                              One day he forgot his basketball jersey
      A Simple Recipe
                              and tried to use his position as “most im-
       for Teamwork:
                              portant player” to force a teammate to
        It is amazing
                              run back to the Wooden farm and fetch it
       how much we
                              for him before the game started.
      can accomplish if
                                   Coach Warriner would not allow it.
      no one cares who
                              Instead, he benched young Wooden and
       gets the credit.
                              kept him on the bench even though it
                              meant losing the game. “Some things are
            more important than the score, Johnny,” was his explana-
            tion. He was telling the young “star” that the star of the
            team is the whole team.


 12
                     ORIGINS OF LEADERSHIP: A COMPASS FOR CORE VALUES




   John Wooden never forgot this message, and its appli-
cation was seen on all of his teams, including those that won
10 national championships.
   As a coach, it was a fundamental principle of his philos-
ophy. Even with superstars such as Kareem Abdul-Jabbar
or Bill Walton, the team was the star.


Teach Details

   Glenn Curtis: Teach Details

   Glenn Curtis, John Wooden’s coach at Martinsville High
School, stressed the importance of basics—fundamentals—
and how to teach them. Coach Curtis would break the me-
chanics of basketball down into small and separate pieces.




          Indiana High School basketball champions, 1927.
           Johnny Wooden, second row, second from right.




                                                                  13
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             The players would practice each individual element until it
             was perfected. Then they would put the pieces back to-
             gether into a whole under the direction of Coach Curtis.
                 This applied to running routes on plays, the mechanics
             of passing, shooting, rebounding, and everything else. Of-
             ten practice consisted of drills without the basketball.
                                  Later, Coach Wooden took this ap-
                              proach much farther in his own system—
      In fact, there are
                              eventually even showing players how to
 no “big” things,only
                              correctly put on socks and lace and tie shoe-
      an accumulation
                              laces on sneakers to prevent blisters.
       of little things
                                  Basics—details, fundamentals—are the
         done well.
                              underpinning of great performance in bas-
                              ketball or business. An organization will
             not achieve or sustain success when sloppiness in the execu-
             tion of relevant details is permitted. John Wooden began
             learning how to squeeze sloppiness out of preparation and
             performance from Coach Curtis. He applied it most effec-
             tively in building the UCLA basketball dynasty.
                 Basics—details and fundamentals—are the underpin-
             ning of great performance in basketball or business.

             Extend Your Family
                 Ward “Piggy” Lambert:
                 Your Team Is Your Extended Family
                 Purdue University’s Ward “Piggy” Lambert was “the
             most principled coach I have ever known,” according to


 14
                     ORIGINS OF LEADERSHIP: A COMPASS FOR CORE VALUES




John Wooden. Mr. Lambert’s impact on his
young guard—a three-time all-consensus All            Successful
American—is profound.                              leadership is not
    As a mentor Coach Lambert taught many            about being
things in many ways. This included his “Big          tough or soft,
Three”: Condition, Fundamentals, and Team             sensitive or
Unity (later, they would be included in the          assertive, but
heart of Coach Wooden’s Pyramid of Suc-              about a set of
cess).                                              attributes. First
    Most important, John Wooden learned             and foremost is
from Coach Lambert’s example that the team             character.
becomes a leader’s extended family. Time and
again the great Purdue coach made decisions that were in
the best interests of “his boys” even when fans and alumni
opposed him.
    When the Purdue Boilermakers—Big Ten champions—
were invited to appear in a tournament at New York’s
Madison Square Garden, Coach Lambert turned it down
because he believed the big city environment—commercial-
ization, gambling, and other temptations—was not in the
best interests of the players.
    His care and concern for their welfare precluded putting
them in a setting that he wouldn’t condone for his own chil-
dren.
    For Coach Lambert, the team was truly his extended
family. “Piggy” Lambert was stern, a taskmaster and a ﬁery
competitor, but he loved his team even to the point of


                                                                      15
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                  Johnny Wooden and Purdue Coach “Piggy” Lambert


         making decisions that caused him to be harshly criticized by
         outsiders. He stood up for “his boys” even when he had to
         stand alone. (A few years later, a gambling scandal at the
         New York tournament involving several college players
         proved Coach Lambert correct.)
             The principled leadership of Ward “Piggy” Lambert was
         the model for what John Wooden set out to become as a
         coach.
                     He stood up for his team even when
                            he had to stand alone.


 16
                      ORIGINS OF LEADERSHIP: A COMPASS FOR CORE VALUES




                      S U M M A R Y


An effective leader is forged by events, experience, observation,
and education. All of this was true in John Wooden’s own evo-
lution in leadership, teaching, and coaching. However, the im-
pact of Earl Warriner, Glenn Curtis, and Ward “Piggy” Lambert
on his philosophy and methodology is surpassed only by that
of his father, Joshua Hugh Wooden.
    When he became a teacher of basketball, a leader of teams,
much of what John Wooden tried to do was a direct reﬂection on
what these mentors had taught while he had been their student.



          C O M P A S S                    C H E C K

                   THE GOLDEN RULE

         Treat others as you would have them treat you.

    •   In today’s business environment, is The Golden Rule
        applicable or naïve? Describe your perspective.




                                                                    17
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             •   Identify three leaders who embody The Golden Rule
                 and three leaders who do not. Evaluate their effective-
                 ness as it applies to “treating people right.”




             •   Everybody pays lip service to The Golden Rule. In what
                 circumstance would you allow yourself to break “The
                 Rule”? Explain your reasoning.




 18
                      ORIGINS OF LEADERSHIP: A COMPASS FOR CORE VALUES




        DAD’S TWO SETS OF THREES
      1. Never lie.             1. Don’t whine.
      2. Never cheat.           2. Don’t complain.
      3. Never steal.           3. Don’t make excuses.


•   What is the practical application of John Wooden’s Two
    Sets of Threes in your own leadership?




•   How resolute are you in applying the ﬁrst Set of Three?




                                                                   19
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             •   Describe your own response to adversity and setbacks.
                 Is the second Set of Three worth including in your lead-
                 ership? In what way?




                 T H E CA U T I O N A G A I N S T C O M PA R I S O N

             “Johnny, don’t worry about being better than somebody
             else, but never cease trying to be the best you can be.
                     You have control over that. Not the other.”


             •   Evaluate your need for approval from others. Does it
                 have a positive or a negative impact? Describe how.




 20
                  ORIGINS OF LEADERSHIP: A COMPASS FOR CORE VALUES




•   Whose opinion/approval matters most to you profes-
    sionally? How does it help or hurt your effectiveness?




•   What drawback(s) may be a result of setting yourself up
    as the ultimate judge of your effort and performance?




                                                               21
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                     DAD’S SEVEN-POINT CREED

             What speciﬁc goal do you pledge to fulﬁll for each point of
             Dad’s Seven-Point Creed? How will you achieve each
             goal?

             1. Be true to yourself.

             2. Help others.

             3. Make each day your masterpiece.

             4. Drink deeply from good books—including the
                Good Book.

             5. Make friendship a ﬁne art.

             6. Build a shelter against a rainy day.

             7. Pray for guidance, count and give thanks for your
                blessings every day.


             My Seven Commitments
             1. Be true to yourself.




 22
                 ORIGINS OF LEADERSHIP: A COMPASS FOR CORE VALUES




2. Help others




3. Make each day your masterpiece.




                                                              23
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             4. Drink deeply from good books—including the Good
               Book.




             5. Make friendship a ﬁne art.




 24
                  ORIGINS OF LEADERSHIP: A COMPASS FOR CORE VALUES




6. Build a shelter against a rainy day.




7. Pray for guidance, count and give thanks for your
   blessings every day.




                                                               25
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                    YOUR LEADERSHIP EVOLUTION

             Various people and events in your life have helped mold
             the person and leader you are.


             •   Describe the mentor(s) who has (have) most inﬂuenced
                 you professionally. Be speciﬁc about what you learned
                 and how it is being applied.




 26
                  ORIGINS OF LEADERSHIP: A COMPASS FOR CORE VALUES




•   How do you teach the principle of “team comes ﬁrst,”
    that is, “we before me”?




•   Give an example of how you or someone on your team
    exhibited a dedication to identifying and perfecting a
    relevant detail. Is this attitude common among team
    members?




                                                               27
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             •   What are your own personal navigation points?




 28
     PA R T   I I



the
PYRA MID
OF SUCCESS
 On the ﬁrst day of practice, Coach Wooden told us,
“Don’t worry about whether you’re doing better than
the next guy. Just give me your best. That’s all I ask.”
      I knew I could do that. He had given me
             a new deﬁnition of success.
               —Rafer Johnson,
    Olympic Gold Medal Winner, Decathlon;
             UCLA Varsity, 1958–59
  My Definition of Success      |   by John Wooden


               I don’t care how tall you are.
                  I care how tall you play.


       hen my Pyramid of Success was featured on the cover
W      of the New York Times Magazine following UCLA’s
ninth March Madness national championship, most read-
ers were puzzled. Many asked, “What is this
new thing? Where did it come from?” Well, it          I do not accept
wasn’t new, and it came from me.                        the notion
    As a first-year teacher in 1932 at Ken-          that the score can
tucky’s Dayton High School, I immediately            make you a loser
became greatly disturbed by the extreme               when you have
pressure many parents placed on students in           done your best.
my English classes. Anything less than an “A”         It cannot. Nor
was often viewed as failure even if the student      can it make you
had worked hard and done their best.                  a winner if you
    Similarly, I was greatly irritated to hear a      have done less
father complain about his son’s secondary             than your best.
role on our basketball team when I knew it
was often the best the young student-athlete
could do. The father’s reaction was unfair and unproduc-
tive. It’s hard to describe my deep disappointment, even dis-
gust, when I saw this happen time and time again.


                                                                       31
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                How would you feel if you’d worked hard, paid atten-
            tion, done your best!—only to be called a loser by someone
            you respected? Regardless of age, many would simply quit
            trying. I did not want anyone under my supervision to ever
                          quit trying to do their best. And few ever did.
                              Personal experience had taught me that
      A leader must
                          sometimes you’re defeated even when you do
       be what he
                          your best. On those occasions when the UCLA
  wants the team
                          Bruins prepared hard and played to their po-
       to become.
                          tential, I judged them as a success even when
      Your example
                          we were outscored, and told them so. Was
      counts most.
                          there something more I could require of them
                          beyond their best? No.


            Searching for a Standard
            Higher than Merely Winning

              Perhaps I was just trying to ﬁnd a way to teach others
                          what my father had taught me.

                Thus, during the ﬁrst months of teaching and coaching
            at Dayton High School, I decided to develop a self-grading
            system that was both fair and very productive—something
            beyond A’s in the classroom or points scored in a game.
                I remembered what Dad had told me, “Don’t worry
            about being better than somebody else, but never cease try-
            ing to be the best you can be.” I began thinking that success
            should be graded along the lines he described, by one’s


 32
                                                   THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




effort, by how hard you try to achieve your best, whether in
the classroom, sports, or life.
    About this same time I read a very insightful little poem
that gave me additional and speciﬁc direction:

        At God’s footstool to confess,
        A poor soul knelt and bowed his head.
        “I failed,” he cried. The Master said,
        “Thou didst thy best, that is success.”

    That poem summed it up for me: do your best, that is
success. Thus, in 1934, after very careful consideration, I
wrote down my new deﬁnition of success. It is the standard
I asked those under my supervision to strive for most of all.
To me it is the highest and hardest standard to achieve: Suc-
cess is peace of mind that is a direct result of self-satisfaction
in knowing you made the effort to become the best that you
are capable of becoming.
    In my opinion, this definition of success creates a pro-
foundly more productive standard than merely aiming to
“outscore” somebody or trying to be better than another.
Most important of all, it puts success totally under your
own control. No one can give it to you; no one can take it
away. No one except you. And so I began teaching this new
definition of success to English students, student-athletes,
and anyone else who cared to listen.
    However, something unintended occurred almost imme-
diately. What began as a search for a self-grading system for


                                                                      33
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




          those under my supervision became the standard for success
          I applied to myself—the specific manner in which I began
          grading myself in life and leadership.


          A Guide to Success: My Blueprint

                          Don’t judge yourself by what you’ve
                   accomplished, but rather by what you could
                          have accomplished given your ability.

                                   Soon thereafter I recognized that only
                               half of the problem had been addressed,
                               namely, redeﬁning success. As a teacher, I
                               understood it was necessary to help those
                               under my supervision know how to attain
                               it; what each needed to do to achieve suc-
                               cess as I had deﬁned it.
                                   That’s when I began “constructing” the
                               Pyramid of Success—identifying those per-
                               sonal qualities and values that I believe are
                               intrinsic to making the total effort to reach
                               your potential as a person, whether in lead-
                               ership or as part of a team; what it takes to
                               do your best.
                                   I was about to create a blueprint of my
                               own values in life and leadership. You might
                               call them the characteristics and qualities of
 Coach Wooden, Indiana
 Teachers College, 1947        success.


 34
                                                 THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




     The Pyramid contains 15 personal qualities that
         I believe are necessary to achieve success.

    Beginning in 1934, Mr. Wooden began evaluating and
identifying personal characteristics that were prerequisites
for achieving success as he deﬁned it. What must you do to
acquire the peace of mind that is a direct result of self-satis-
faction from knowing you made the effort to become the
best you are capable of becoming?
    As a teaching tool, he chose a structure that represented
durability, strength, and permanence: the pyramid. During
the ensuing 14 years he carefully evaluated, selected, and
placed in speciﬁc locations of his pyramid the 15 personal
qualities—each represented as a specific block—he con-
cluded were necessary for achieving success, both as a leader
and as a member of a fully functioning organization. He
completed the Pyramid of Success in 1948, shortly before


                                                                    35
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




           leaving Indiana State Teachers College to become head bas-
           ketball coach at UCLA. It was the ﬁrst thing Coach Wooden
           tacked up on the wall of his office at 301 Kerckhoff Hall
           (see page 35).

                  Success is peace of mind, which is a direct result of
                  self-satisfaction in knowing you made the effort to
                        become the best you are capable of becoming.




                                               SUCCESS
                                                U   S


                                                 Competitive
                                                                   Patie




                                                  Greatness
                                       Faith




                                                                      ce n




                                         Poise               Confidence




                           Condition                Skill               Team Spirit




                Self-Control       Alertness                  Initiative         Intentness




      Industriousness     Friendship               Loyalty             Cooperation       Enthusiasm



              T H E        P Y R A M I D                    O F        S U CCES S



 36
                                                 THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




              The Foundation
               of the Pyra mid

Industriousness
        The heights by great men reached and kept,
        Were not attained by sudden flight.
        But they, while their companions slept,
        Were toiling upward in the night.
             —Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

There is no trick, no easy way. Success travels in the company
of very hard work. Work—hard physical labor—was a con-
stant in John Wooden’s childhood. There was no electricity
or indoor plumbing. A healthy mule was con-
sidered a modern convenience.
    He and his brothers quickly learned they’d
go hungry if they didn’t work. It was one of
the ﬁrst lessons in life he learned.
    It was also the first block chosen—a
cornerstone—for the Pyramid of Success. He
called it “Industriousness” because of his ac-
curate assessment that the word “work” had
lost real meaning. For most people, it meant
going through the motions, putting in time, enduring bore-
dom. Mr. Wooden had something else in mind.
    Industriousness, as he understood it, meant true work
at your highest capacity; fully engaged, totally focused, and


                                                                    37
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                                completely absorbed; no clock-watching, no
                                punching in and out, no going through the
  Industriousness               motions.
      entails rising                 It is also something you cannot simply
  above the level               will yourself to do. The young teacher knew
      of hard work.             from personal experience that to reach Indus-
                                triousness, a companion was necessary.


             XXXXXXXOOOOOO COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                                       INDUSTRIOUSNESS
                 •     You can work without Industriousness, but there is no
                       Industriousness without work.
                 •     Only you truly know if you’re rising to a level beyond
                       plain “hard work.”
                 •     “The heights . . .” attained by Tiger Woods, Cal Ripken,
                       and Jack Nicklaus came from a will to win, coupled
                       with their great will to work.
                 •     It is not what you achieve that matters, but what you
                       could have achieved. Industriousness is a key—
                       irreplaceable—factor in becoming the best you can be.


             Enthusiasm
                        Work without ENTHUSIASM is just work.
                        “Just work” is not enough.

             Your energy and enjoyment, drive, and dedication will stim-
             ulate and greatly inspire others.


 38
                                                THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




As a leader, you must be ﬁlled with energy and eagerness,
joy and love for what you do. If you lack enthusiasm for
your job, you cannot perform to the best of your ability.
Industriousness is unattainable without Enthusiasm.


    At the family farm in Indiana, Johnny Wooden under-
stood that plowing an acre of hard-baked dirt behind two
mules in 100-degree July heat was hard work. He also knew
that basketball practice as conducted by his high school
coach, Glenn Curtis, was even harder. In fact, it was physi-
cally and mentally more grueling than ﬁeld work. And yet
John Wooden thrived on it. Why? Enthusiasm. His heart
was in it.
    Industriousness is unattainable without Enthusiasm.
You must love what you do. If not, it is impossible to bring
out your best.
    Enthusiasm was quickly chosen as the second corner-
stone in Mr. Wooden’s pyramid. Hard work is transformed
into Industriousness when joined with Enthusiasm. To-
gether they catapult your performance engine to its highest
level. It is the most formidable engine of productivity.
    Enthusiasm infuses and stimulates those you lead. The
energy and enjoyment, drive and dedication you exude is
emulated by those in your organization. According to
Coach Wooden, “In my opinion, these two qualities, Indus-
triousness and Enthusiasm, are always present in those who
scale the heights—who achieve success as I deﬁne it.”


                                                                   39
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                 Hard work is transformed into Industriousness
                           when joined with Enthusiasm.


         XXXXXXXOOOOOO
                     COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                                    ENTHUSIASM

             •   If your heart is not in your job, you cannot work to your
                 full potential.

             •   A leader lacking Enthusiasm will infect the group with
                 the same malady.

             •   Enthusiasm is the ignition switch. Turn it on and things
                 start happening.

             •   If you lack Enthusiasm for your job, get out or at least
                 recognize that you will never perform at your highest
                 level.




           “ Working Together” Block s
              within the Foundation

         Between these potent foundation cornerstones of the Pyra-
         mid—Industriousness and Enthusiasm—Coach Wooden
         placed three “working together” blocks, personal qualities
         that are necessary because most of what we do involves in-
         teracting and working with others: Friendship, Loyalty, and
         Cooperation.


 40
                                                THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




Friendship
        The time to make friends is
        before you need them.

Strive to build a team ﬁlled with camaraderie and respect:
comrades-in-arms. Friendship in the context of leadership
may strike you as a perplexing choice. Is it wise for leaders
to become “friends” with those under their supervision?
Could it undermine decision making when hard decisions
are called for?
    Coach Wooden suggests that we have
                                                        To make a
friendships of different kinds: an acquain-
                                                     friend, you must
tance with whom we share an interest in pol-
                                                       be a friend.
itics or sports; another whose humor we
enjoy; golfing, bowling, or fishing buddies.
All are friends in different ways, but not in the way John
Wooden means Friendship as it pertains to leadership and
team building.
    The two characteristics of Friendship he identiﬁes as of
supreme importance for a leader to possess and instill in
team members are the following: respect and camaraderie.
    Camaraderie is a spirit of great goodwill that can exist
between a leader and members of the team—comrades-in-
arms. Think of how much you’ll give when asked to do so by
someone you respect; someone who is your comrade-in-arms.
You’ll give everything you’ve got. Those under your leader-
ship will do the same if these qualities are offered by you.


                                                                      41
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




              Seek to create a team that possesses camaraderie
           and respect, whose members are “comrades-in-arms.”
           Where it exists, you’ll ﬁnd a tightly knit organization.



         XXXXXXXOOOOOO
                   COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:



                                   FRIENDSHIP

            • Respect, esteem, and camaraderie are characteristics of

              Friendship necessary for a high-performance team.

            • Friendship is mutual, but the leader may have to be the

              ﬁrst to prime the pump.

            • Friendship includes others and is a powerful bonding agent.

            • To paraphrase Abe Lincoln, “You destroy your adversary

              when you make him your friend.”




         Loyalty

                 There is a destiny that makes us brothers,
                 None goes his way alone.
                 All that we send out to others,
                 Comes back into our own.
                               —Edwin Markham


         Be true to yourself. Be true to those you lead. Loyalty cre-
         ates trust. Loyalty is part of man’s higher nature. It is also
         part of the nature of great teams and those who lead them.


 42
                                               THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




The power of Loyalty is the reason Mr. Wooden placed it in
the center of the Pyramid’s foundation.
   Is it possible to be a good leader without Loyalty to
those on your team? Is it possible to be a good citizen with-
out Loyalty to your country? The answer to both questions
is the same. Of course not.
   You must have the courage to be loyal to those you lead.
This is not always easy. It starts, however, with Loyalty to
yourself—your standards, your system, your
values.                                               Give loyalty
   “To thine own self be true,” Polonius ad-        and loyalty will
vised his son, Laertes, in Hamlet. Coach             be returned in
Wooden extends that exhortation: “First, do           abundance.
not betray yourself. Second, do not betray
those you lead.” This is Loyalty.
   People do not arrive at your organization’s doorstep
with Loyalty. It comes when they perceive that your concern
for their interests and welfare goes beyond simply calculat-
ing what they can do for you or how you can use them to
your advantage.
   John Wooden believes that most people—the over-
whelming majority—wish to be in an organization whose
leadership cares about them; provides fairness and respect,
dignity and consideration; and holds them to high standards.
   Do this and you will find Loyalty in abundance from
those you lead. You will ﬁnd yourself in charge of an orga-
nization that will not wafﬂe in the wind.


                                                                      43
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             For that to happen, you must be true to yourself and your
         team. You must have Loyalty to those you lead. And when
         you give it, you will get it back from your team.


         XXXXXXXOOOOOO
                     COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                                         LOYALTY

             •   First, be true to yourself and your beliefs. Second, be
                 true to your team.

             •   Respect is a prerequisite for Loyalty. You gain respect
                 by giving respect.

             •   Just as you cannot be a good citizen without Loyalty to
                 your country, neither can you be a good leader without
                 Loyalty to your team.

             •   Let those you lead know you have sincere care, con-
                 cern, and consideration for their welfare and you will
                 generate great Loyalty from those on the team.



         Cooperation

                  Make sure the people you lead
                  feel they’re working with you, not for you.

         Have the utmost concern for what’s right rather than who’s
         right. For this to occur, the final block of the pyramid’s
         foundation must be present and active: Cooperation.




 44
                                                  THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




   It is often difﬁcult for a strong-willed leader to incorpo-
rate Cooperation because listening to others, evaluating,
and embracing their opinions and creativity may seem to
suggest uncertainty and doubt about your
own judgment and convictions. The ego gets
in the way of your eyes and ears. It’s easy to          Much can be

get lost in your own tunnel vision.                    accomplished

   An effective leader understands it is a sign        by teamwork

of strength to welcome honest differences and          when no one is

new ideas from those on your team as well as          concerned about

others. Progress is difficult when you won’t          who gets credit.

listen. Cooperation is impossible if we refuse
to consider the merits of contrary opinions.
   A dictator-style leader is all answers and no questions.
The most effective leader incorporates the productive ideas
and creativity of others, knowing it makes things work bet-
ter. That’s what John Wooden seeks: not just making some-
thing work, but making it work better and better.
   Cooperation—the sharing of ideas, creativity, responsi-
bilities, and tasks—is a priority of effective leadership.
The only thing that is not shared is blame. A strong and se-
cure leader accepts blame and gives the credit. A weak in-
secure leader gives blame and takes credit.
   In basketball, one of the undervalued acts that Coach
Wooden most values is the assist—helping a teammate score
a basket. The assist in basketball epitomizes Cooperation.




                                                                      45
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         The assist is valuable in all organizations—helping someone
         do their job better. It makes “scorers” out of everyone.



         XXXXXXXOOOOOO
                     COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                                    COOPERATION

             •   Much can be accomplished when nobody cares about
                 who gets the credit.


             •   “One hand washes the other” is a good motto for a
                 team seeking Cooperation.


             •   A strong team of ﬁeld horses pulling in different direc-
                 tions will go nowhere.


             •   Seek the right way, not just having it your way.




                         The Second Tier
                         of the Pyra mid

         John Wooden chose four traits for the Pyramid’s second tier
         that primarily involve control and direction of your mental
         and emotional faculties. The ﬁrst quality block is the most
         explicit in this regard.




 46
                                                   THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




Self-Control
        If you do your best, never lose your temper,
        and never be out-fought or out-hustled,
        you’ll have nothing to worry about.

Control of your organization begins with control of yourself.
Be disciplined. Getting to the top, even once, is most difﬁcult.
Staying there is arduous. Mr. Wooden understands that both
getting there and staying there present unique and formida-
ble challenges. To do either requires great personal disci-
pline: Self-Control.
    Control of self is essential for consistency in leadership
and team performance. Coach Wooden views consistency as
a trademark of the true competitor and effective leader. This
is impossible to achieve without Self-Control.
    Self-Control is necessary in all areas. The
                                                          Discipline
choices you make in your personal life affect
                                                         yourself and
your professional life. They are not separate. A
                                                         others won’t
leader who lacks Self-Control outside the or-
                                                           need to.
ganization may lack it within the organization.
    It starts with control of your emotions,
but it extends to having the resolve to resist the easy choice,
the expedient solution, and, at times, temptation in all its al-
luring forms.
    Self-Control in little things becomes Self-Control in big
things. Coach Wooden prohibited profanity during practices




                                                                        47
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         and games because it showed loss of control. In this small
         way—prohibiting profanity—he taught Self-Control that
         could be applied in other areas.
             He told his teams that when they lose control, they make
         themselves vulnerable. The same is true for a leader who
         lacks Self-Control.
             How did he teach Self-Control? In large part through
         his own example. His personal control of self became more
         and more effective over the course of many years. Ulti-
         mately it led an announcer to proclaim during a game,
         “Coach Wooden must be very upset. He just raised an eye-
         brow!”


         XXXXXXXOOOOOO
                     COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                                    SELF-CONTROL

             •   You cannot function responsibly and productively if you
                 lack personal discipline—especially in the area of emo-
                 tions. Anger is the most common culprit, but not the
                 only one.

             •   Clear thinking is clouded by emotionalism.

             •   Self-Control creates consistency. Consistency is cru-
                 cial to getting to the top and staying there.

             •   An undisciplined team is the best evidence of an undis-
                 ciplined leader.




 48
                                                 THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




Alertness
         Nothing is static. Expect each day to
         bring new threat and opportunity.

Constantly be aware and observing. Always seek to im-
prove yourself and the team. Alertness—the ability to
observe, absorb, and understand what’s going on around
you—is a critical component for the individ-
ual in charge, the leader, as well as those he
                                                        Never be a
leads.
                                                        spectator.
    You must constantly be awake, alive, and
                                                      Be in the ﬁght
alert in evaluating yourself as well as the
                                                       at all times.
strengths and weaknesses of your organiza-
tion and those of the competition.
    In sports today we see instantaneous adjustments dur-
ing play: video, photos, and spotters in the booths with
binoculars providing immediate information on the game.
    Should it be different with you and your team? The
same sense of urgent observation—Alertness—must exist in
you and be taught to those under your supervision.
    A leader who is sluggish in recognizing what’s going on
will soon be going on without a job.
    John Wooden’s father liked to remind him that most of
what he’d learn in life would come from others. That can
happen only if you exhibit Alertness. A driver who’s asleep
at the wheel, not alert, will crash. The same happens to or-
ganizations whose leader does not exhibit Alertness. To


                                                                       49
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         learn, you must listen. Coach Wooden advises, “Don’t just
         act like you’re listening. Really listen. Good leaders are
         good listeners.” It helps heighten Alertness.

                    Alertness must exist in you and be taught
                          to those under your supervision.


         XXXXXXXOOOOOO
                     COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                                        ALERTNESS

             •   Perfection doesn’t exist. Thus, actively be alert and
                 looking for imperfections in your team and your com-
                 petition. It is there. Find it.

             •   Stick to your guns, but be open to change or you will be
                 blindsided.

             •   Sports teams are constantly adjusting during a game to
                 what the opponent does. Do the same.

             •   “Heads-up” leadership is alert to opportunity, threat,
                 trends, and changes.



         Initiative

                  Failure to act is often the
                  biggest failure of all.

         Have the courage to make decisions and the willingness to
         risk failure. A basketball team that won’t risk mistakes won’t
         win many games. The same is true for any organization.


 50
                                                   THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




Fouls, errors, and mistakes are part of the competitive
process in sports, business, and life. Not careless or sloppy
mistakes, but those resulting from assertive action based on
proper assessment of risk.
    John Wooden’s outstanding coach at Purdue, “Piggy”
Lambert, summed it up like this: “The team that makes the
most mistakes wins.” He was talking about the next block
of the pyramid: Initiative.
    Many leaders instinctively behave like a
young college basketball player who picks up           Assume failure.
three quick fouls in the ﬁrst half and becomes         Don’t just stand
cautious, tentative, and timid. A smart coach          around waiting
will sit this player on the bench before he can        to see if the ball
hurt the team.                                             goes in.
    The tentative business leader, however,            Assume it won’t.
stays in the contest, to the eventual detriment          Get ready to
of the organization. Hesitancy brought on by           respond quickly
fear of failure is not a characteristic of great        and correctly.
leadership. Play to win rather than “not to
lose.”
    Coach Wooden instructed players, “Be quick, but don’t
hurry.” Once you’ve decided on a course of action, take ac-
tion. Initiate quickly, but not carelessly or in a fashion so
hurried that a miscue is more likely.
    Do not be afraid to fail. Use good judgment and then
use Initiative. The leader who fears failure will often fail to
act when action is required.


                                                                         51
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             As a rule, Coach Wooden never benched or admonished a
         player who tried in an intelligent way to make something hap-
         pen on the court—even when they failed. He did not want
         an environment where individuals were afraid to risk failure.

             A leader must have Initiative—the courage to make
                  decisions and the willingness to risk failure.


         XXXXXXXOOOOOO
                     COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                                         INITIATIVE

             •   Fear of failure is often the biggest failure of all.

             •   Have the courage to believe that you have nothing to
                 fear when you’ve prepared your organization to the
                 best of your ability.

             •   Respect all. Fear none.

             •   Never rebuke someone who makes a mistake after
                 careful planning and proper preparation.



         Intentness
                  It’s not who starts the game,
                  but who finishes it.

         Stay the course. When thwarted, try again—harder, smarter.
         Persevere relentlessly. Intentness is as important as any sin-
         gle block in John Wooden’s Pyramid of Success. Without it
         you will falter, fade, and fall.


 52
                                                THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




    Mr. Wooden chose the word Intentness to suggest per-
sistence and determination, fortitude and resolve. All of
these traits are present in a great leader.
    When Intentness exists within you, it
                                                 Never be satisﬁed.
also will exist within your organization. Un-
                                                 Work constantly
fortunately, the reverse is also true. Lead-
                                                    to improve.
ers lacking Intentness will ﬁnd themselves
                                                   Perfection is a
leading teams intent on quitting, on ﬁnding
                                                   goal that can
the nearest exit.
                                                 never be reached,
    Intentness also implies a ﬁrm resolve to
                                                 but it must be the
stay the course over the long term rather
                                                   objective. The
than a burst of short-lived activity.
                                                   uphill climb is
    Intentness keeps you in the game even
                                                   slow, but the
when others tell you the game is over. The
                                                   downhill road
game is over only when you, the leader,
                                                       is fast.
say so.
    Good things take time, usually lots of
time. Achieving worthwhile goals requires Intentness. There
are setbacks, losses, unexpected reversals, hardships, and
bad luck. Does the fight continue? The team looks to you
for their answer. Your answer is Intentness.
    Industriousness and Enthusiasm are a powerful combi-
nation essential to Success. But the great force they produce
must be constant and ongoing. They require Intentness.


          Things achieved without effort are seldom
                 worthwhile or long-lasting.


                                                                      53
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         XXXXXXXOOOOOO
                     COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                                    INTENTNESS

             •   Worthwhile goals often present formidable obstacles. It
                 takes time to overcome serious challenges; accept it.

             •   Persevere! Change course, start over, alter methods,
                 go over, around, or under. Do not give up.

             •   Nothing of consequence occurs without Intentness.

             •   Impatience can corrode and corrupt Intentness.




         Condition

                  What you do away from practice can tear
                  down all we accomplished during practice.


         Ability may get you to the top, but character keeps you
         there: mental, moral, and physical. Obviously physical con-
         ditioning is necessary—good health, vitality, and energy.
         However, in choosing Condition as a block in the heart of
         the Pyramid, Coach Wooden went beyond physical assets.
             He understands that to achieve your leadership poten-
         tial, you must also possess mental and moral strength. All
         three are present in this next block: Condition.


 54
                                                THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




   How does one attain moral Condition? John Wooden
has prescribed a commonsense method for decades: Prac-
tice moderation and balance in all that you do.
   Following a grueling basketball practice aimed, in part,
at building up the players’ physical strength, he would ad-
vise them of the following: “All we’ve worked so hard to ac-
complish on the court today can be torn down
quickly, in a matter of minutes, if you make
                                                      Be concerned
the wrong choices between now and our next
                                                        with your
practice.”
                                                      preparation,
   He cautioned that when moderation and
                                                       not theirs;
balance are lacking in their choices and sub-
                                                    your execution,
sequent actions, the team can be damaged. To
                                                        not theirs;
help them understand what he meant—that
                                                     your effort and
ultimate responsibility for success lay with
                                                    desire, not theirs.
them—Coach Wooden occasionally posted
                                                      Don’t worry
the following reminder on the UCLA team
                                                      about them.
bulletin board:
                                                    Let them worry
   “There is a choice you have to make, in
                                                       about you.
everything you do. So keep in mind that in
the end, the choice you make, makes you.”
   And, of course, the choices made by the leader count most
of all because they ultimately make, or break, your team.
   Mental, moral, and physical Condition—in balance—
are crucial to effective leadership. A leader who lacks phys-
ical Condition is less likely to summon the mental strength
to stand up and ﬁght for beliefs and convictions. You may


                                                                      55
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         have observed how those who weaken themselves physi-
         cally often fall prey to an assortment of lapses in the area of
         good judgment.
             Condition—physical, mental, and moral—is essential to
         being an effective and consistent leader. That’s why Condi-
         tion is in the center of the pyramid, so close to the heart of
         the structure.


         XXXXXXXOOOOOO COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                                        CONDITION

             •     Character constitutes a component of Condition.

             •     What you do off the job is directly related to how well
                   you do on the job.

             •     Moderation and balance are significant factors in at-
                   taining proper Condition.

             •     Physical Condition is impossible without mental and
                   moral Condition.



         Skill
                    When you are through learning,
                    you are through.

         What a leader learns after having learned it all counts most
         of all.
             Fundamentals in basketball means having comprehen-
         sive knowledge of the X’s and O’s and physical mechanics


 56
                                                  THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




of the game—where to go and when to go there; how to
shoot a shot or block a shot correctly.
    We can appreciate that Skill is a requirement not only in
basketball for both a coach and the players, but for any
leader and organization. You must know what you’re do-
ing. Thus, Skill is at the very heart of the pyramid.
    Know your job and be able to do it quickly and correctly.
Knowledge of and the ability to execute your responsibili-
ties will separate you from most of the com-
petition. This means being prepared to do all
                                                         Push yourself
that your job requires.
                                                        to keep learning
    Mr. Wooden saw many coaches who
                                                        or you will stay
could teach offense but were limited in their
                                                          as close to
knowledge of defense. As a coach, he had play-
                                                         the bottom as
ers who were skilled shooters, but couldn’t get
                                                          to the top.
open. Others were skilled at getting open, but
couldn’t shoot.
    Whether in basketball or in business, you must be able
to “get open” and “shoot.” One without the other makes
you a partial performer: one who can be replaced because
your skills are incomplete; one whose leadership falls short
because of your own limitations when it comes to knowing
your job.
    The skills necessary for leadership differ from organiza-
tion to organization. Those required to manage a restaurant
differ from those of a sales manager, just as coaching bas-
ketball has different requirements from coaching baseball.


                                                                         57
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         But regardless of the skills a particular profession requires,
         you must master them.
             You must also be fully aware that mastery is a lifelong
         process of learning. The best leaders are those who realize
         it’s what you learn after you know it all that counts most.



         XXXXXXXOOOOOO
                     COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                                          SKILL

             •   Complete competence is required. You must be able to
                 execute all elements of your job or you are a partial per-
                 former.

             •   Experience is valuable. Skill is more valuable. Together
                 they are invaluable.

             •   Skill means you can execute all facets of your job prop-
                 erly and quickly.

             •   Knowing what you’re supposed to do means little if you
                 don’t have the Skill to do it.




         Team Spirit

                  The star of your team is the team.

         “We” supersedes “me.”
             Initially, Mr. Wooden deﬁned Team Spirit as “a willing-
         ness to lose oneself in the group for the good of the group.”


 58
                                                  THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




Something about this deﬁnition was bothersome to him, but
he couldn’t put his ﬁnger on the problem.
    Then one morning at breakfast he read a magazine ar-
ticle about a person who was described as having “an ea-
gerness” to do some professional activity he was involved
in. Coach Wooden recognized what had been wrong in his
initial deﬁnition of Team Spirit.
    A “willingness” to be selfless does not
                                                       Unselﬁsh team
satisfy his requirements. It suggests begrudg-
                                                          play and
ingly doing what is required for the team’s
                                                         team spirit
welfare. Coach Wooden wanted each player to
                                                       are two of the
be eager to sacriﬁce personal interests for the
                                                          foremost
good of the group. Thus, as the pyramid was
                                                        essentials for
nearing its final form, he changed that one
                                                        our success.
word in the deﬁnition: “willingness” became
“eagerness.”
    Team Spirit—an eagerness to sacriﬁce personal interests
or glory for the welfare of the group—is a tangible living
force that transforms individuals who are “doing their jobs
willingly” into an organization whose members are dedi-
cated and eager to work at their highest level for the good
of the group.
    When this happens, the result is transformative. Just as
Enthusiasm ignites Industriousness, Team Spirit is a catalyst
for raising all the supporting qualities of the Pyramid to ex-
traordinary heights because it creates a deep desire to do
everything within your potential to strengthen your team.


                                                                         59
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             When Team Spirit exists within your organization, the
         resulting productivity is exponential: your team becomes
         greater than the sum of its players; the organization greater
         than the talent and size of its personnel.
             CEOs increasingly are media personalities whose own
         star—they seem to believe—shines brighter than the orga-
         nization they lead.
             There is only one star of importance: the team. The player
         or leader who seeks to have his or her star shine brighter
         than the group’s is someone Mr. Wooden would want to
         neither coach nor play for.


         XXXXXXXOOOOOO
                     COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                                       TEAM SPIRIT

             •   Comprehend the difference between “willingness” and
                 “eagerness,” “selfishness” and “selflessness.” Teach
                 your team the difference.

             •   Team Spirit means you are willing to sacriﬁce personal
                 considerations for the welfare of the organization.

             •   Team Spirit starts at the top. The leader, you, must per-
                 sonify Team Spirit.

             •   There is only one star that matters. The team is the star
                 that matters.




 60
                                               THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




      Getting to the Top:
    Tradem ark s of Greatness

The Good Book says, “As ye sow, so shall ye reap.” The three
tiers of the Pyramid that are now in place allow you to reap
a rewarding and profound bounty, one that will produce two
qualities closely identiﬁed with John Wooden and his teams.
They are the two blocks near the apex of the Pyramid.



Poise

        If you can meet with Triumph and
        Disaster and treat those two impostors
        just the same . . .
                    —Rudyard Kipling

Just be yourself. Don’t be rattled by events, whether good
or bad. This may sound easy, but Poise can be a most elu-
sive quality in challenging times. Leaders lacking Poise
panic under pressure.
   Poise means holding true to your belief that what counts
most are your own high standards and making the effort to
do the best of which you are capable regardless of how bad,
or good, the situation may be.
   Poise means being true to yourself even if it goes against
popular sentiment, even if you must stand alone. It means




                                                                  61
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         avoiding pose or pretense, comparing yourself to others,
         acting like someone you’re not. It means having a brave
         heart in all circumstances.
             You’ll know you possess Poise when you achieve what
         Rudyard Kipling described above in his poem written a
         hundred years ago.
             That’s Poise—not being thrown off stride in what you
         believe or how you behave because of outside events—
         “keeping your head when all about you are losing theirs.”
             The competitive environment challenges your compo-
         sure and equanimity on a continuing basis as the stakes get
         high. Few characteristics are more valuable to a leader than
         Poise—especially under pressure. And pressure is what lead-
         ers are paid to deal with.
             When Poise is present, you’ll perform at your own per-
         sonal best because Poise precludes panic. You’ll understand
         what you’re supposed to do, and do it even when the odds
         are against you, even when the experts say you’ll fail.
             How do you acquire Poise? In fact, you don’t. Poise ac-
         quires you. It is part of the harvest you reap near the top of
         the Pyramid. Suddenly it is there, part of you and your lead-
         ership style and substance: Poise. It also becomes the style
         and substance of your organization.


                      Have respect for, without fear of,
                  every opponent, and conﬁdence without
                       cockiness in regard to yourself.


 62
                                                      THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




XXXXXXXOOOOOO
            COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                                 POISE

    •   Poise means being true to oneself—not getting rattled,
        thrown off balance regardless of circumstances.

    •   You don’t acquire Poise; it acquires you after you’ve
        prepared properly. The ﬁrst 12 blocks of the Pyramid—
        personal qualities—are Coach Wooden’s road map to
        proper preparation.

    •   Poise means avoiding pose or pretense, comparing
        yourself to others, or acting like something you’re not.

    •   Poise means staying cool, calm, and collected when
        things really heat up.




Confidence

         You must earn the right to be confident,
         the kind of confidence that comes from
         proper preparation.


The strongest steel is well-founded self-belief. It is earned,
not given. Self-belief is the knowledge that your preparation
is complete, that you have done all things possible to ready
yourself and your organization for the competition in what-
ever form it arrives.


                                                                         63
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             Conﬁdence cannot be grafted on artiﬁcially. Real abid-
         ing Conﬁdence, like Poise, is earned only by tenaciously at-
         taining those assets that allow you to reach your own level
         of competency. For John Wooden, those assets are con-
         tained in and offered by the aforementioned personal char-
         acteristics and qualities of the Pyramid of Success.
             Confidence must be monitored so that it does not
         spoil—rot—and become arrogance, the feeling of superior-
         ity that fosters an assumption that past success can be re-
         peated automatically without the same hard effort that
         brought it about in the ﬁrst place.
             Thus, Coach Wooden has never gone into a game assum-
         ing victory. Neither did he ever assume defeat. He assumed
         nothing other than that he had taught those under his su-
         pervision how to bring out their best in competition. “Every
         opponent is to be respected; no opponent is to be feared if
         you have prepared properly.” This is what he taught those
         under his supervision.
             In fact, the quality, or lack thereof, of the competition
         had nothing to do with his level of Conﬁdence. Rather, he
         drew strength from the sure knowledge that he had done all
         things possible to prepare himself and the team to perform
         at their highest level.
             The competition may perform at a higher level, or not.
         He didn’t concern himself with the competition’s potential.
         His focus was on achieving his own potential as a leader




 64
                                                     THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




and teaching his players how to do it as a team, an organiza-
tion exhibiting the crowning characteristic of his pyramid.
   Success requires Poise and Confidence, which come
with proper preparation. It is the belief of John Wooden
that acquiring the personal characteristics and values of the
pyramid is, in fact, maximum preparation.
   When you have prepared properly—and do not under-
estimate the great challenge of proper and complete
preparation—you will acquire the final—ultimate—block
of the Pyramid of Success.


                    You must earn the right
                         to be conﬁdent.




XXXXXXXOOOOOO
           COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:



                          CONFIDENCE

   •   Believe in yourself and others will believe in you.

   •   Well-founded Conﬁdence is contagious.

   •   Conﬁdence must not become arrogance.

   •   All supporting tiers of the Pyramid of Success give you
       the right to be Conﬁdent (and have Poise).




                                                                        65
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                     Beyond the winning and the goal,
                      beyond the glory and the fame,
                     He feels the ﬂame within his soul,
                       born of the spirit of the game.
                     And where the barriers may wait,
                      built up by the opposing Gods,
                      He ﬁnds a thrill in bucking fate
                     and riding down the endless odds.


                      Where others wither in the ﬁre
                      or fall below some raw mishap.
                      Where others lag behind or tire
                     and break beneath the handicap,
                     He ﬁnds a new and deeper thrill
                      to take him on the uphill spin,
                      Because the test is greater still,
                      and something he can revel in.
                           [Emphasis mine—SJ.]

                         —Grantland Rice from
                        “The Great Competitor”




 66
                                                THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




            What It ’s All About


Competitive Greatness

        A goal beyond victory,
        a standard above winning.


For over half a century, John Wooden has deﬁned Compet-
itive Greatness as follows: Performing at your best when
your best is needed; a real love for the hard battle.
    The great competitors he has played for, coached, and
admired through many decades share a joy derived from the
struggle itself—the journey—because only in that great ef-
fort of preparation and performance is there opportunity to
bring forth your best, a personal greatness that cannot be
diminished or dismissed because of a ﬁnal score or the bot-
tom line.
    Competitive Greatness, for John Wooden, is not deﬁned
by Rudyard Kipling’s “triumph” nor denied by “disaster.”
It exists in what precedes those two “impostors” and their
accomplices fame, fortune, and power—conventional meas-
urements of Competitive Greatness (and success) that Mr.
Wooden reconﬁgured long ago. Competitive Greatness ex-
ists in the journey and culminates in the tough competitive
fight in which you and your organization are at your best
because you’ve prepared to the full extent of your abilities.


                                                                   67
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             Subsequently, there is nothing tiresome for Mr. Wooden
         in the old adage, “When the going gets tough, the tough get
         going.” He has tried hard to meet that criterion and teach it
         to others throughout his career.
             This is one of the most crucial concepts a leader can
         carry and convey to those within the organization: namely,
         a love for the hard battle and the test it provides against a
         worthy opponent. The struggle is to be welcomed, never
         feared.
             When you deﬁne success as John Wooden does, the only
         thing to fear is your own unwillingness to make the effort—
         100 percent—to achieve your potential in leadership and
         teach those on your team how to achieve Competitive
         Greatness as an organization.
             A Great Competitor welcomes the worthy opponent
         and the hard battle and deﬁnes success, ﬁrst and foremost,
         by performing at their best when their very best is needed.
         A great leader teaches the organization to do the same. He
         also teaches that the “score” will then take care of itself.
             When this occurs, it means you have arrived at the top,
         prepared to bring out the best in yourself and those under
         your leadership. You are a Great Competitor who leads a
         team capable of Competitive Greatness.
             The struggle itself—the journey—is what gives value to
         the prize and is something the great competitive leader truly
         revels in. It is your responsibility to teach those under your
         supervision the same.


 68
                                                     THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




XXXXXXXOOOOOO
            COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                       COMPETITIVE GREATNESS

•       Competitive Greatness is brought forth only in the hard
        battle with a worthy opponent.

•       Competitive Greatness is not deﬁned by victory or de-
        nied by defeat, but by being your best when your best
        is required.

•       Teach your team to welcome setbacks, stiff opposition,
        and contrary conditions. It offers the opportunity to
        separate themselves from all the others.

•       Preparation—the ﬁrst four tiers of the Pyramid of Suc-
        cess—is the prelude to being at your best when your
        best is needed: Competitive Greatness.




                         S U M M A R Y


    •    A pyramid has traditionally symbolized longevity
         and durability, strength and power.

    •    John Wooden chose the pyramid structure because it
         offered a format that was an effective teaching tool:
         each block assigned a value, each tier built on what
         came before. All leading to the apex—Success: peace
         of mind that is a direct result of self-satisfaction in


                                                                        69
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                  knowing you made the effort to become the best you
                  are capable of becoming.

              •   “Work” for most means going through the motions.
                  Mr. Wooden had something else in mind and chose a
                  word to reﬂect that: Industriousness.

              •   Industriousness is not possible unless it is partnered
                  with Enthusiasm. Together they become the engine
                  that drives everything forward with great power.

              •   Most everything that we do involves working with
                  others. Mr. Wooden chose three blocks that are nec-
                  essary for this to be done well: Friendship, Loyalty,
                  and Cooperation. Together they represent the “work-
                  ing together” blocks in the Pyramid’s foundation.

              •   Self-Control, Alertness, Initiative, and Intentness
                  extend the foundation’s characteristics and provide
                  support for the heart of the pyramid.

              •   The heart of the Pyramid of Success is Condition
                  (physical, mental, and moral), Skill, and Team Spirit.

              •   Near the apex, Coach Wooden placed Poise and
                  Conﬁdence. They come to you with proper
                  preparation: the ﬁrst three tiers.

              •   Competitive Greatness is possessing the ability to do
                  your best when your best is needed. It comes with
                  preparation and a love of the hard battle.


 70
                                                THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




  Personal greatness is not determined by the size of the
job, but by the size of the effort that one puts into the job.
           This applies to everyone on your team.



           Faith and Patience:
            Symbolic Mortar

John Wooden added “mortar” at the top of the pyramid
with the qualities of Patience and Faith.
    They are symbolic and remind us that Patience and
Faith must be present throughout the pyramid, holding the
blocks and tiers firmly in place. A leader must have Faith
that things will work out as they should—a boundless be-
lief in the future.


                                                                   71
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             A wise leader also knows that good things take time. If
         difﬁcult goals could be achieved quickly, more people would
         be achievers. But most people—many leaders—lack Pa-
         tience.
             Success is always attainable when deﬁned correctly; that
         is, making the effort—100 percent—to do the best of which
         you are capable. The 15 personal qualities of the pyramid
         are Coach Wooden’s building blocks for success. You, and
         no one else, control whether you achieve success. You have
         it within your grasp, within your own power, to make the
         total effort. As leader, you have the responsibility to teach
         your organization how to do it.
             Ultimately, the words of Joshua Hugh Wooden, Coach’s
         father, describe it well: “When you’ve done your best, you
         may call yourself a success.” You may also call yourself a
         Great Competitor—a leader who resides at the top of the
         pyramid where success and you are one and the same.

                   Big things are accomplished only through
                        the perfection of minor details.



                                Success

         As a teacher, coach, and leader, John Wooden’s goal has al-
         ways been to help members of the team achieve their poten-
         tial both individually and as a group.




 72
                                                  THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




    The 15 personal qualities of the Pyramid are a simple
way of illustrating what he required. In clear terms, it shows
what he expected of them and what they could expect from
him. As a teacher, success was his subject, the Pyramid of
Success was his textbook.


             Success may result in winning, but
                winning does not necessarily
              make you a success. Success, as I
                deﬁne it, is harder to achieve.



                     S U M M A R Y


For John Wooden, success comes from the knowledge that you
made the full effort to do the best of which you are capable.
    When asked, “Coach Wooden, how did you win those
championships?” he answers as follows: “I didn’t win a single
championship. Our team did. I like to believe that my teaching
helped them accomplish that. The quality of my teaching and
leadership and the effort I put into it is where I found—and
continue to ﬁnd—my deﬁning and ultimate success. Not in the
final score.” But he will usually add, “And if the final score
was to my liking, that made it all the better.”
    While others will judge you strictly in relation to some-
body or something else—the ﬁnal score, the bottom line—this




                                                                     73
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         is neither the most demanding nor the most productive stan-
         dard. Throughout John Wooden’s career, he did not allow
         others to deﬁne success for him, to impose their version of suc-
         cess on his leadership.
             He sums it up simply:“If I did my best I believed in my heart
         that I was a success. Whether our team won a championship
         or not had little to do with my ﬁnal reckoning of my success.”



                   C O M P A S S                   C H E C K

                       SUCCESS IN LEADERSHIP

             •   What is your personal deﬁnition of Success?




 74
                                                 THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




•   What is your evaluation of John Wooden’s deﬁnition of
    Success—its relevance, applicability, and effectiveness?




      CREATING YOUR OWN PYRAMID

                    The Foundation
                   INDUSTRIOUSNESS

•   Select one individual in your past experience, personal
    or otherwise (i.e., historical figure, personal contact,
    book or movie character, etc.), who best personifies
    Industriousness. Describe in what way this person ex-
    empliﬁes it.




                                                                    75
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             •   Excluding yourself, who best exhibits Industriousness
                 on your team? Describe the manner in which this per-
                 son displays it.




             •   How can you encourage Industriousness beyond what-
                 ever you currently do?




 76
                                                 THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




                     ENTHUSIASM

•   Select one individual in your past experience, personal
    or otherwise (i.e., historical figure, personal contact,
    book or movie character, etc.), who best personifies
    Enthusiasm. Describe in what way this person exempli-
    ﬁes it.




•   Excluding yourself, who best exhibits Enthusiasm on
    your team? Describe the manner in which this person
    displays it.




                                                                    77
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             •   How can you encourage Enthusiasm beyond whatever
                 you currently do?




                                     FRIENDSHIP

             •   Select one individual in your past experience, personal
                 or otherwise (i.e., historical figure, personal contact,
                 book or movie character, etc.), who best personifies
                 Friendship. Describe the way this person exempliﬁes it.




 78
                                             THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




•   Excluding yourself, who best exhibits Friendship on
    your team? Describe the manner in which this person
    displays it.




•   How can you encourage Friendship beyond whatever
    you currently do?




                                                                79
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                                     L O Y A LT Y

             •   Select one individual in your past experience, personal
                 or otherwise (i.e., historical figure, personal contact,
                 book or movie character, etc.), who best personifies
                 Loyalty. Describe in what way this person exempliﬁes it.




             •   Excluding yourself, who best exhibits Loyalty on your
                 team? Describe the manner in which this individual
                 displays it.




 80
                                                 THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




•   How can you encourage Loyalty beyond whatever you
    currently do?




                    C O O P E R AT I O N

•   Select one individual in your past experience, personal
    or otherwise (i.e., historical figure, personal contact,
    book or movie character, etc.), who best personifies
    Cooperation. Describe in what way this person exem-
    pliﬁes it.




                                                                    81
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             •   Excluding yourself, who best exhibits Cooperation on
                 your team? Describe the manner in which this individ-
                 ual displays it.




             •   How can you encourage Cooperation beyond whatever
                 you currently do?




 82
                                                 THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




                       The Second Tier
                       SELF-CONTROL

•   Select one individual in your past experience, personal
    or otherwise (i.e., historical figure, personal contact,
    book or movie character, etc.), who best personifies
    Self-Control. Describe in what way this person exem-
    pliﬁes it.




•   Excluding yourself, who best exhibits Self-Control on
    your team? Describe the manner in which this individ-
    ual displays it.




                                                                    83
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             •   How can you encourage Self-Control beyond whatever
                 you currently do?




                                     ALERTNESS

             •   Select one individual in your past experience, personal
                 or otherwise (i.e., historical figure, personal contact,
                 book or movie character, etc.), who best personifies
                 Alertness. Describe in what way this person exempli-
                 ﬁes it.




 84
                                                THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




•   Excluding yourself, who best exhibits Alertness on your
    team? Describe the manner in which this person dis-
    plays it.




•   How can you encourage Alertness beyond whatever
    you currently do?




                                                                   85
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                                     I N I T I AT I V E

             •   Select one individual in your past experience, personal
                 or otherwise (i.e., historical ﬁgure, personal contact, book
                 or movie character, etc.), who best personiﬁes Initiative.
                 Describe in what way this individual exempliﬁes it.




             •   Excluding yourself, who best exhibits Initiative on your
                 team? Describe the manner in which this person dis-
                 plays it.




 86
                                                    THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




•   How can you encourage Initiative beyond whatever you
    currently do?




                       INTENTNESS

•   Select one individual in your past experience, personal
    or otherwise (i.e., historical ﬁgure, personal contact, book
    or movie character, etc.), who best personiﬁes Intent-
    ness. Describe in what way this person exempliﬁes it.




                                                                       87
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             •   Excluding yourself, who best exhibits Intentness on
                 your team? Describe the manner in which this individ-
                 ual displays it.




             •   How can you encourage Intentness beyond whatever
                 you currently do?




 88
                                                 THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




                     The Third Tier
                      CONDITION

•   Select one individual in your past experience, personal
    or otherwise (i.e., historical figure, personal contact,
    book or movie character, etc.), who best personifies
    Condition. Describe in what way this person exempli-
    ﬁes it.




•   Excluding yourself, who best exhibits Condition on your
    team? Describe the manner in which this person dis-
    plays it.




                                                                    89
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             •   How can you encourage Condition beyond whatever
                 you currently do?




                                       SKILL

             •   Select one individual in your past experience, personal
                 or otherwise (i.e., historical figure, personal contact,
                 book or movie character, etc.), who best personifies
                 Skill. Describe in what way this person exempliﬁes it.




 90
                                                THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




•   Excluding yourself, who best exhibits Skill on your
    team? Describe the manner in which this individual dis-
    plays it.




•   How can you encourage Skill beyond whatever you
    currently do?




                                                                   91
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                                  TEAM SPIRIT

             •   Select one individual in your past experience, personal
                 or otherwise (i.e., historical figure, personal contact,
                 book or movie character, etc.), who best personifies
                 Team Spirit. Describe in what way this person exempli-
                 ﬁes it.




             •   Excluding yourself,who best exhibits Team Spirit on your
                 team? Describe the manner in which this individuals
                 displays it.




 92
                                                 THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




•   How can you encourage Team Spirit beyond whatever
    you currently do?




                    The Fourth Tier
                          POISE

•   Select one individual in your past experience, personal
    or otherwise (i.e., historical figure, personal contact,
    book or movie character, etc.), who best personifies
    Poise. Describe in what way this person exempliﬁes it.




                                                                    93
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             •   Excluding yourself, who best exhibits Poise on your
                 team? Describe the manner in which this individual dis-
                 plays it.




             •   How can you encourage Poise beyond whatever you
                 currently do?




 94
                                                 THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




                       CONFIDENCE

•   Select one individual in your past experience, personal
    or otherwise (i.e., historical figure, personal contact,
    book or movie character, etc.), who best personifies
    Conﬁdence. Describe in what way this person exempli-
    ﬁes it.




•   Excluding yourself, who best exhibits Confidence on
    your team? Describe the manner in which this individ-
    ual displays it.




                                                                    95
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             •   How can you encourage Conﬁdence beyond whatever
                 you currently do?




                                     The Pinnacle
                         C O M P E T I T I V E G R E AT N E S S

             •   Select one individual in your past experience, personal
                 or otherwise (i.e., historical figure, personal contact,
                 book or movie character, etc.), who best personifies
                 Competitive Greatness. Describe in what way this per-
                 son exempliﬁes it.




 96
                                              THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




•   Excluding yourself, who best exhibits Competitive
    Greatness on your team? Describe the manner in which
    this individual displays it.




•   How can you encourage Competitive Greatness be-
    yond whatever you currently do?




                                                                 97
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                    CREATE YOUR DREAM TEAM




                                                 U           S

                                                 Competitive
                                                  Greatness
                                                                   Patie
                                       Faith




                                                                      ce n


                                         Poise               Confidence




                           Condition                 Skill              Team Spirit




                 Self-Control       Alertness                 Initiative         Intentness




       Industriousness     Friendship              Loyalty             Cooperation       Enthusiasm




               TH E        P Y RAM I D                       OF        S U C C E S S




 98
                                                THE PYRAMID OF SUCCESS




•   In the Pyramid on the facing page, write the name of
    the individual who best personiﬁes the personal quality
    of each block.




                                                                   99
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             •   Evaluate how you can incorporate elements of each
                 Dream Team individual you selected into your own skills
                 as leader.




100
     PA R T   I I I



12 LESSONS
IN
LEADERSHIP
This page intentionally left blank
 Leadership lesson # 1: Good
 Values Attract Good People


         Treat all people with dignity and respect.



What I Learned
     by Kareem Abdul-Jabbar
     UCLA varsity, 1967–69;
     three NCAA national championships

John Wooden built his basketball program a certain way—
athletically, ethically, morally—because he believed it would
attract a certain type of person, the kind of individual he
wanted on the team. He was right.




                                                                103
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             I chose UCLA and Coach Wooden in large part because
         of those values. It was like that movie, Field of Dreams:
         “Build it and they will come.” He built it. We came.



         What It Means
              by Steve Jamison

         Kareem Abdul-Jabbar is “the most valuable player to a team
         in the history of the college game,” in the judgment of Coach
         John Wooden. Abdul-Jabbar went on to become the NBA’s
         all-time scoring leader.
             As a high school player at New York’s Power Memorial
         Academy, Abdul-Jabbar was the most sought-after student-
         athlete in America. The coaching community was in general
         agreement: the school he chose would soon be the national
         champion.
             Why did this extremely talented young man, a native
         New Yorker who wanted to stay close to home, choose to at-
         tend a university that was on the other side of the country—
         UCLA? The simple answer? Values.
             Kareem Abdul-Jabbar had become aware of the values
         and standards of UCLA, including full integration and high
         academic standards. He had also become aware of the char-
         acter of its coach, John Wooden. Former players had repeat-
         edly told the young high school star, “Coach Wooden is
         color blind when it comes to race.”




104
                                            12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




   UCLA and its varsity basketball coach were the beneﬁ-
ciaries of the great athletic and academic talent of Kareem
Abdul-Jabbar because he was drawn to their
shared values and standards. He was not the
                                                    Character—
only individual to choose UCLA over other
                                                   doing the right
opportunities because of its outstanding rep-
                                                      thing—is
utation.
                                                   fundamental to
   Values, standards, and character mattered
                                                      successful
to Abdul-Jabbar and his parents, Cora and
                                                     leadership.
Lewis Sr. They also mattered to John Wooden.
And in large part he learned them from his
dad, Joshua Hugh Wooden, and his three inﬂuential mentors,
Earl Warriner, Glenn Curtis, and Ward “Piggy” Lambert.
   You and your organization’s good values, standards,
and productive attitudes will attract individuals who have
the same.



  My Perspective    |   by John Wooden



     ristotle said, “We are what we repeatedly do.” He was
A    referring to character—the habits of our daily behav-
ior that reveal who and what we are. I wanted to create
good habits in those under my leadership. Standards, val-
ues, and attitudes were important to me. I wanted them to
matter to those I taught.




                                                                   105
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             Here’s a good deﬁnition of character: respect for your-
         self, respect for others, respect for the rules. For those I
         coached, I believed that character started with little things
         like picking up after yourself (rather than expecting the
         team manager to clean up your mess) and extends to big
         things like honesty, compassion, and the 15 personal quali-
         ties I placed in the Pyramid of Success. I sought individuals
         who had character rather than individuals who were just
         characters.
             Leadership is about more than making people do what
         you say. A prison guard can do that. A good leader creates
         belief—in the leader, in the organization, in its mission. This
         is difﬁcult to do where a vacuum of values exists, where the
         only thing that matters is a bottom line, winning the race.
         All kinds of bad things can happen when the only thing that
         matters is “winning.” Just read the newspapers today and
         you'll ﬁnd all the evidence you need that this is true.
             The kind of people I wanted to have running the race
         with me were those with whom I shared a code of behav-
         ior—values and standards. This didn’t always happen—after
         all, people are human—but one of the primary ways to en-
         sure that this occurs is to make your values visible, to let the
         outside world know what you stand for and who you are.
             In doing so, you will attract those who share your prin-
         ciples and standards.
             Your behavior as leader—what you do—creates the en-
         vironment in which the team functions.


106
                                                  12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




XXXXXXXOOOOOO
            COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


             GOOD VALUES ATTRACT GOOD PEOPLE

   •    Good values are like a magnet. So are bad values.

   •    Make your values visible; what you do is who you are.
        Who you are is what the organization becomes. People
        actually do “follow the leader.”

   •    Character starts with little things and extends to big
        things. Ralph Waldo Emerson says, “Character is cu-
        mulative.”

   •    Select people who are seeking you and your organiza-
        tion. Perhaps they recognize shared values, standards,
        and attitudes.




         leadership Lesson # 2:
        Use the Most Powerful
          Four-Letter Word

What I Learned
       by Jim Powers
       South Bend Central High, 1941–43;
       Indiana State Teachers College, 1947–48

During World War II I’d been shot down in a B-24 bomb-
ing raid on Italian oil fields and almost got killed. I had a
fear of ﬂying after that—would not get on a plane.


                                                                       107
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             When I got out of the military, I went to Indiana State,
         where John Wooden was head coach. He had been my
         coach at South Bend Central High School. One week we
         were scheduled to play a game in New York, which meant
         an airplane trip to the East Coast. There was no way I in-
         tended to get on that plane. Absolutely no way.
             When Coach Wooden found out about my problem and
         why I wouldn’t ﬂy, he said the solution was simple: “Nobody
         on this team gets left behind.” So he rounded up cars, and
         we drove to New York.
             If you played for John Wooden, you were part of his
         family. We felt like we were in a family. And we were. In
         fact, I still feel like I’m part of his family.

                   Be more concerned with what you can do
                  for others than what others can do for you.
                        You’ll be surprised at the result.


108
                                              12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




What It Means
     by Steve Jamison

John Wooden did not consider those he coached as plug-in
parts, “jocks” whose value was in direct proportion to the
number of points they could score. In a very real sense, he
felt each student-athlete was a member of his extended fam-
ily. And he reminds us, “Love is present in a good family.”
You must demonstrate it in appropriate ways with support
and concern within a disciplined environment.
    In the early days of his teaching, Coach Wooden started
each season by trying to express his intention to be impar-
tial with the following statement: “I will like you all the
same.” And then he would add, “And, I will
treat you all the same.” Of course, this turned
                                                     The smallest
out to be false.
                                                      good deed is
    There were some players on the squad
                                                    better than the
that Coach Wooden could hardly stand, and
                                                     best intention.
it troubled him because he felt strongly that a
leader should be “friends” with those under
his supervision. Furthermore, he recognized that he did not
treat a hardworking player the same as one who was less
so. Treating everyone the same, he soon realized, was
unfair.
    During this period he read a statement by Amos Alonzo
Stagg, Chicago’s legendary football coach, that helped him
reformulate his perspective on the relationship between a


                                                                       109
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         leader and the team. Coach Stagg said, “I loved all my play-
         ers the same; I just didn’t like them all the same.”
             By the time Coach Wooden arrived at UCLA, his mes-
         sage to the players at the beginning of each season was as
         follows: “I will not like you all the same, but I will love you
         all the same. Furthermore, I will try very hard not to let my
         feelings interfere with my judgment of your performance.
         You receive the treatment you earn and deserve.”



           My Perspective      |   by John Wooden



              obody cares how much you know until they know
         N    how much you care. The individuals on our UCLA
         teams became true members of my extended family.
             I once bailed a player out of jail for a driving violation
         even though it went against conference rules. These and
         other acts of kindness and concern were small gestures, but
         a direct result of the feelings—the love—I had for those un-
         der my supervision. It’s vital to let those you lead know you
         care. First, of course, you must have that care in your heart
         for those you lead.
             And while I could have great love in my heart for those
         under my supervision, I would not tolerate behavior from
         anyone that was detrimental, or potentially detrimental, to
         the welfare of our group.




110
                                                    12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




   For me, it is possible to have the greatest care and con-
cern for someone and bench, suspend, or even remove him
from the team.


XXXXXXXOOOOOO
            COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


       USE THE MOST POWERFUL FOUR-LETTER WORD

   •    The people in your organization are your extended family.

   •    Coach Stagg’s advice is apt: “Love” is more important
        than “like.”

   •    Treating everyone “the same” is not fair. Each member
        of your team should get what they earn and deserve.

   •    Seek opportunities to show you care. The smallest
        gestures often make the biggest difference.

   •    Love does not mean you tolerate bad behavior.




         leadership Lesson # 3:
       C all Yourself a Teacher


What I Learned
       by Denny Crum
       UCLA varsity, 1958–59; assistant coach, 1969–71;
       two NCAA national championships;
       head coach, University of Louisville




                                                                         111
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             Coach Wooden’s philosophy was to teach what was
         necessary to make UCLA a better team—the best we could
         be. Teach it; practice it. The details and all of the fundamen-
         tals were his main concern. Thus, he never talked about the
         winning or the losing. He wouldn’t come in before a game
         and say, “This team is tied with us in the conference, so
         we’ve got to step it up tonight. Let’s win this one.”
             He just wasn’t concerned about the opponents and what
         they might be up to—didn’t even scout most of them. He
         felt that if he taught us what was necessary, we’d do fine.
         He was really a good teacher.


                     Each member of your team has the
                       potential for personal greatness;
                 a leader’s job is to teach them how to do it.


112
                                              12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




What It Means
     by Steve Jamison

The outside world knows your profession—what you do—
by the title on your business card: sales manager, CEO, pro-
duction supervisor, or something else. However, don’t be
misled by what it says on your card.
   In the eyes of many observers, John Wooden’s business
card should say “Coach,” but this is not what he would
choose. From the earliest years he has called himself a
teacher.
   The most effective leaders are good teachers. What does
an effective leader teach? Regardless of context, it is the
same, namely, how to perform at your highest level in ways
that serve the welfare of the organization.
   If there is a single reason the UCLA Bruins enjoyed suc-
cess in basketball while John Wooden was head coach, it
was because he learned how to be a good teacher, not only
of the X’s and O’s, but of the more elusive qualities such as
Team Spirit, Cooperation, Initiative, and the other compo-
nents of his Pyramid of Success.
   As a young and inexperienced coach, John Wooden was
impatient. When things weren’t done correctly “right now,”
he pushed harder and talked louder.
   Increasingly he began using the Four Laws of Learning:
Explanation, Demonstration, Imitation—correction when
necessary—and Repetition. These are the same as the Four


                                                                   113
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         Laws of Teaching, and both require great patience. This is
         why he included Patience in the pyramid.
             An effective teacher must also have a good hat rack, one
         with plenty of hooks for all the different “hats” you wear:
         teacher, of course, but also disciplinarian, counselor, role
         model, psychologist, motivator, timekeeper, quality control
         expert, talent judge, referee, organizer, and more.


                   An effective leader is very good at listening.
                   It’s difﬁcult to listen when you are talking.



           My Perspective       |   by John Wooden


              good teacher is a good student, a lifelong learner. No
         A    two people are the same. Each individual under your
         leadership is unique. There is no formula that applies to all
         when it comes to teaching and leading. All won’t follow;
         some need a push. Some you drive, others you lead. Recog-
         nizing the difference requires a knowledge of human nature.
         That’s where being a good student helps you in your lead-
         ership.
             I taught by offering information in small bite-size pieces
         rather than large chunks that couldn’t be assimilated easily.
         I tried to set the example I wanted those I coached to follow.
         The greatest teaching tool is your own example. I studied
         human nature. I kept learning. I kept teaching.


114
                                                    12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




   And when I asked the question 100 times, I asked it
again: “How can I help our team improve?”


XXXXXXXOOOOOO
            COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                   CALL YOURSELF A TEACHER

   •    The greatest teaching tool is your own example. Your
        deeds count more than your words.

   •    Be patient. People progress at different speeds.

   •    A good teacher wears many hats. Make sure they all ﬁt
        your head.

   •    A good demonstration is more effective than a great
        description.

   •    A great leader is a teacher who is a lifelong student.




         leadership Lesson # 4:
        Emotion Is Your Enemy


What I Learned
       by Fred Slaughter
       UCLA varsity, 1962–64;
       one NCAA national championship

There were four or ﬁve games in my career when we started
out way behind like, 18–2—just getting killed. I’d look over


                                                                         115
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         at Coach Wooden, and there he’d sit on the bench with his
         program rolled up in his hand—totally unaffected, almost
         like we were ahead. And I’d think to myself, “Hey, if he’s
         not worried, why should I be worried?”
             Instead of panic, I settled down, and so did the team. We
         won each of those games except one.
             John Wooden was cool when it counted; his conﬁdence
         and strength and attitude became our conﬁdence, strength,
         and attitude. In three years on the UCLA varsity, I never
         once saw him get rattled, and we had some nerve-rattling
         games, including a last-second loss in the Final Four to
         Cincinnati.
             Coach was cool, and he taught us to be the same. Espe-
         cially under pressure.


116
                                              12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




What It Means
     by Steve Jamison

Extreme intensity—controlled and correctly directed—is an
essential ingredient for unswerving—consistent—productivity
and competitiveness. Emotionalism—temperamental ﬂare-
ups and drop-offs—makes consistent high performance im-
possible.
   A leader controlled by emotions will produce a team
whose trademark is the roller coaster—ups and downs in
performance; unpredictability in effort and concentration;
one day good, the next day bad. John Wooden has deep dis-
dain for the “roller-coaster” pattern in both effort and per-
formance.
   Thus, he never gave rah-rah speeches or
contrived pep talks. For every artiﬁcial emo-        If you let your
tional peak attained, you and your team will         emotions take
be subjected to a valley, a letdown.                  over, you will
   Coach Wooden demanded intense and                 be outplayed.
steady effort with the goal of producing con-
sistent ongoing learning and improvement.
This, in his view, was preferable to getting individuals
heated up for some arbitrary peak in performance, which
would be followed inevitably by a drop-off in effort and ex-
ecution.
   In all UCLA basketball practices and games, he de-
manded intensity that did not boil over into emotionalism


                                                                       117
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




            and loss of self-control. Former UCLA center Bill Walton
            describes that intensity during a practice as equal to what
            he experienced in actual games—including games to decide
            a championship.
                Ideally John Wooden wanted the team to improve during
            each practice and game—every day, each week—throughout
            the season until they were at their ﬁnest on the ﬁnal day of
            the year.
                Steady, constant, reliable, and complete effort that leads
            to improvement that was manifested in performance at an
                          increasingly high standard was his goal. It is
                          almost impossible to overstate the primacy of
  Intensity makes
                          this goal in his leadership philosophy and
      you stronger.
                          methodology. To achieve it, Coach Wooden
      Emotionalism
                          required emotional control both in himself
 makes you weaker.
                          and in those under his leadership. It took him
                          many years before he mastered it, and even
            then not completely. He prized intensity and viewed emo-
            tionalism as a weakness.



               My Perspective    |   by John Wooden


                 ome observers described me as being detached, almost
            S    stoic, on the bench during games. This could hardly
            be further from the truth, but it was a compliment never-
            theless.


118
                                                12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




    Emotionalism—ups and downs in moods, temperamen-
tal outbursts—is almost always counterproductive, at times
ruinous.
    I came to understand that if my own behavior was ﬁlled
with outbursts, peaks and valleys of emotion and moods, I
was sanctioning it for others. As the leader, my own behav-
ior set the bounds of acceptability.
    Subsequently, I became much more vigilant in control-
ling my feelings and behavior. My message to those I led
was simple: “If you let your emotions take control, you
have lost control. You are vulnerable.” For those under my
supervision to learn the lesson, however, I had to control my
own behavior and emotions.
    Subsequently, I never second-guessed myself for deci-
sions and actions that didn’t work out if they were made us-
ing my best judgment and all available information. It may
have been a mistake, but it was not an error.
    It becomes an error, however, when the choice was made
because emotions spilled over and diminished the quality of
my decision making. Early in my career the errors were
common; there were fewer as my emotional control became
more disciplined.
    A leader deﬁned by intensity is a stronger leader. A leader
ruled by emotions is weak, the team vulnerable.




                                                                     119
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         XXXXXXXOOOOOOCOACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                              EMOTION IS YOUR ENEMY

             •    Seek and prize consistently applied high intensity.

             •    Emotionalism makes a leader (and team) vulnerable.

             •    Emotional peaks lead to emotional valleys.

             •    Consistency in high performance is the mark of a
                  champion.




         Leadership lesson # 5: It Takes
          10 Hands to Score a B asket


         What I Learned
                 by Ray Regan
                 South Bend Central High School varsity, 1938–39

         I remember we used to have a showboat on our team, a
         player who was always yelling for the ball, and then once
         he got it would keep it until he took a shot. Then he’d start
         yelling for the ball again. He was having trouble with Coach
         Wooden’s concept of teamwork and sharing.
             One day Coach decided to teach this guy a lesson. He
         took us aside and said to pass the basketball to the show-
         boat and then immediately run to the middle of the court—


120
                                              12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




all four of his teammates—sit down, and let him face the
other squad alone.
    It was Coach’s way of showing that everybody helps
everybody or nothing gets done. The showboat started pass-
ing the ball after that.


        Be sure you acknowledge and give credit to
       a teammate who hits you with a scoring pass
              or for any ﬁne play he may make.


What It Means
     by Steve Jamison

In basketball, a ﬁeld goal is scored only after several hands
have touched the ball. In business, the “ball” is knowledge,
experience, ideas, and information. Whether on the court




                                                                   121
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




            or off, that “ball” must be shared quickly and efﬁciently to
            achieve success.
                A salesperson, or any other member of your organiza-
            tion who has the “ball,” must share it. A “me ﬁrst” person
            puts the team second. That person is not a team player.
                Getting those under your supervision to think “team
            first” starts when you teach every person in the organiza-
            tion that their role is important in some way to the welfare
            of the group.
                All roles, every job, contribute in their own way to the
            success of the organization. Some individuals are more difﬁ-
                            cult to replace than others because of differ-
                            ences in ability, but every person you bring into
  Have one team,
                            your organization contributes—or should—
      not starters
                            to the overall success of the group.
  and substitutes.
                                Each must feel valued, from the secretary
      No one feels
                            to the salesperson to the senior manager. When
      good being a
                            they understand that they are contributing
      “substitute.”
                            members of the team and that their role has
                            value, good things will occur.
                For this reason, Coach Wooden was the ﬁrst in college
            basketball to insist on the “acknowledge your teammate”
            rule—namely, giving a nod or a wink to the player who gave
            an assist.
                Coach Wooden wanted the player who scored a basket
            to understand that he was only as good as the team assist-
            ing him, that it takes 10 hands to score two points.


122
                                               12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




  My Perspective     |   by John Wooden


     o matter how great your product, if one of your de-
N    partments doesn’t produce, you won’t get the results
you want. Everybody must do their job.
    I told players that we, as a team, are like a powerful race
car. Maybe a Bill Walton or Kareem Abdul-Jabbar is the big
engine, but if one wheel is flat, we’re going no place. And
if we have brand new tires but the lug nuts are missing,
the wheels come off. What good is the powerful engine
then, when the wheels come off? Every part, big or small,
on that race car matters. Everything contributes to the run-
ning of the race. And, of course, a car needs a driver. I was
the driver.
    I don’t need scientific evidence to know that Rudyard
Kipling was correct: “For the strength of the pack is the
wolf; and the strength of the wolf is the pack.”
    That describes the relationship between the individual
and the organization—the player and the team.



                   Acquire peace of mind
                    by making the effort
                    to become the best of
                   which you are capable.




                                                                    123
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         XXXXXXXOOOOOOCOACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                     IT TAKES 10 HANDS TO SCORE A BASKET

             •    The star of your team is the team. Both you and your
                  organization must fully comprehend that fact.

             •    The best talent doesn’t always make the best team.

             •    Teamwork means sharing—the ball, information, con-
                  tacts, ideas.

             •    An organization that lacks selﬂessness among its mem-
                  bers is like a race car with a powerful engine and a ﬂat
                  tire. Everybody assists everybody.




                    Leadership Lesson # 6:
                     Little Things M ake
                     Big Things Happen

         What I Learned
                 by Lynn Shackleford
                 UCLA varsity, 1967–69; three NCAA national
                 championships

         There was logic to every move. Details of socks, shoelaces,
         and hair length led to details of running plays, handling the
         ball, and scoring points—hundreds of small things done ex-
         actly as Coach Wooden wanted them done.


124
                                               12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




    Everything was related to everything else; nothing was
left to chance. Sloppiness was not allowed in anything, not
in passing, shooting, or trimming your ﬁngernails and tuck-
ing in your jersey.
    Coach Wooden taught that great things can only be ac-
complished by doing the little things right. Doing things right
became a habit with us. Habits stand up under pressure.



                Big things are accomplished
                only through the perfection
                      of minor details.




                                                                    125
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             What It Means
                     by Steve Jamison

             Leadership often places such emphasis on reaching a distant
             and lofty goal (annual sales results in business; winning a
             championship in sports) that inadequate attention is paid to
             what it takes to get there—the day-by-day, minute-to-minute
             relevant details of how you do your job.
                    Sloppiness in tending to details is common—the norm—
             in sports and in most organizations. When it occurs, blame
             rests with you, the leader, not with those in the organization.
                                 High performance is achieved only through
                             the identiﬁcation and perfection of the small
      Minor details,
                             but relevant details, little things done well.
 like pennies, add
                                 Those under your leadership must be
       up. A good
                             taught that little things make big things hap-
       banker isn’t
                             pen. First they must be taught that there are no
      careless with
                             big things, only a logical accumulation of little
  pennies; a good
                             things done at a high standard of execution.
       leader isn’t
                                 At UCLA John Wooden worked hard to
      careless with
                             ensure that standards—the norm—in the area
         details.
                             of details were set extremely high. “Normal”
                             was abnormally high.
                    Outside observers and even some players thought the
             hundreds of specifics he selected for attention and perfec-
             tion were foolish. Coach Wooden knew that those details—
             for example, putting on sweat socks correctly—were the


126
                                                 12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




foundation of future success and competitive greatness. Your
ability to see this profound connection in your own work is
essential to good leadership.
      While Coach Wooden strove for perfection, “perfec-
tionist” is not a description he would choose for himself.
Perfection, he believes, is not attainable by mortal man.
Striving for it with utmost effort, however, is attainable.
Thus, he was relentless in looking for ways to improve per-
formance. When he identiﬁed something that could move a
team closer to perfection, he taught them how to do it.
      No relevant detail is too small to be done correctly.


    My Perspective     |   by John Wooden


    consider each detail like a rivet in the wing of an airplane.
I   Remove one rivet from the wing and it makes no difference.
Remove enough of them, however, and the wing falls off.
      I didn’t want anything to fall off when it came to the
performance of the UCLA Bruins basketball team in prac-
tice or in games. Thus, every detail that was relevant was
important and deserved to be done the right way.
      Just as there is a correct way to put on sweat socks, there
is a correct way of executing everything in basketball.
There is a correct way of doing every job in every organization.
      For me, there isn’t an “approximate” way to shoot a
jump shot. There is an exact and precise method for doing
it, one that affords the best chance for making the shot with


                                                                      127
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         allowances for the speciﬁc situation. And this is true for all
         other aspects of playing the game.
             My fervor to see that relevant details were perfected in
         all areas was intended to set the tone, in style and in sub-
         stance, for how the UCLA Bruins conducted business. Our
         standards were very high in the execution of relevant details.
         Most observers saw only the trophy. Few comprehended the
         magnitude of perfected details preceding the trophy.
             I love to see little things done correctly. In my experi-
         ence, that may be as close to anything that I can identify as
         being “the secret of success”: little things done right.


         XXXXXXXOOOOOO
                     COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                   LITTLE THINGS MAKE BIG THINGS HAPPEN

             •   There are no big things; only an accumulation of little
                 things that must be done well.

             •   Details are like rivets in the wing of an airplane. Remove
                 enough of them and the wing falls off.

             •   Success starts from the ground up. Understand the re-
                 lationship between “socks” and success.

             •   Talent must be nourished in an environment of high per-
                 formance standards. Sloppiness breeds sloppiness.
                 When it comes to details, teach good habits.




128
                                              12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




  Leadership Lesson # 7: M ake
  Each Day Your M asterpiece


What I Learned
     by Eddie Powell
     South Bend Central High School; player,
     assistant coach, Indiana State Teachers College,
     1947–48; assistant coach, UCLA, 1948–52

The South Bend Central team bus was scheduled to leave
for our game against Mishawaka High School at exactly
6 p.m. All of us players were in our seats and ready to go ex-
cept for two guys. They happened to be the co-captains of
our team, the South Bend Central Bears. Probably our best
players.
    “Driver, what time do you have,” Coach Wooden asked
when he stepped on board the bus. The driver looked at his




                                                                   129
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         watch and said, “It’s exactly 6 p.m., Coach.” Coach Wooden
         replied, “Well, that’s what time my watch says, too. I guess
         it must be 6 p.m.” He looked hard at those two empty seats
         and said to the driver, “Let’s go.” Coach left our two most
         valuable players behind. Nobody was late after that. The
         lesson was passed on from team to team each year. Time
         meant a lot to Coach Wooden.


           Activity to produce real results must be organized and
           executed meticulously. Otherwise, it’s no different from
             children running around the playground at recess.



         What It Means
              by Steve Jamison

         There is not enough time. A leader must be very astute in us-
         ing time productively and teaching those in the organization
         to do the same. John Wooden understood he had exactly
         210 hours of practice time to accomplish his teaching goals
         (105 practices, each two hours in length). Or, as journalists
         and fans would say, Coach Wooden had 210 hours to win
         a national championship—12,600 minutes of actual prac-
         tice time during the regular season.
             Coach Wooden placed great value on every single one of
         those 12,600 minutes; each was a never-to-be-regained op-
         portunity to teach the team what they needed to know to
         achieve Competitive Greatness, to outscore the competition.


130
                                             12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




   Time, used correctly, is perhaps your most important as-
set. Take it away and you have nothing. Wasting a single
moment became painful for him, like throwing a gold coin
into the ocean never to be recovered.
   John Wooden’s own appreciation for time
                                                      If you do not
may have begun with his father’s advice in
                                                      have the time
the Seven-Point Creed: “Make each day your
                                                      to do it right,
masterpiece.” It was Joshua Hugh Wooden’s
                                                     when will you
way of reminding his son to use time wisely,
                                                     ﬁnd the time to
not wastefully. Time is invisible. Its effects
                                                       do it over?
are not.
   Only when you fully comprehend the sig-
niﬁcance of a single minute will you begin to treat the hour
with respect. You will notice that successful leaders do not
disrespect time.
   Coach Wooden strove to make each meeting a master-
piece, each practice perfect. This came from his understand-
ing that how you practice is how you play—in sports and
elsewhere. He taught himself the mastery of using time to
its greatest advantage.


  My Perspective    |     by John Wooden


      ne of the very few rules I enforced from my ﬁrst day of
O     coaching until my last was as follows: “Be on time.”
Players—even assistant coaches—who broke this rule faced
serious consequences.


                                                                        131
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             Being late showed disrespect for time. I felt that one of
         the ways I could signal my own reverence for time was to
         insist on punctuality. And, to be punctual myself.
             If a player appeared to be taking it easy during practice,
         not giving it everything he had, I told him sternly, “Don’t
         think you can make up for it by working twice as hard to-
         morrow. If you have it within your power to work twice as
         hard, I want you to do it right now.” This was another way
         of telling them not to waste time; to make this practice a
         masterpiece.
             I believe effective organization of time—budgeting and
         managing time—was one of my assets as a coach. I under-
         stood how to use time to its most productive ends. Gradu-
         ally, I had learned how to get the most out of a minute. In
         return, each minute gave back the most to our team.
             I was never the greatest X’s and O’s coach around.
         Never. But I was among the best when it came to respecting
         and utilizing time. I valued it, gave it respect, and tried to
         make each minute a masterpiece.



                              It’s what you learn
                             after you know it all
                                 that counts.




132
                                                      12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




XXXXXXXOOOOOO
            COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


             MAKE EACH DAY YOUR MASTERPIECE

   •    You have nothing without time. Treat it with great respect.

   •    A productive “quarter” begins with a masterful minute.

   •    Don’t mistake activity for achievement.

   •    Treat time carelessly and it will do the same to you and
        your organization.

   •    Personal punctuality is a good way to teach respect
        for time.




         Leadership lesson # 8:
            The C arrot Is
         Mightier Than a Stick

What I Learned
       by Bill Walton
       UCLA varsity, 1972–74;
       two NCAA national championships

Coach Wooden expected you to be really good. Being really
good was normal. He didn’t think we needed to be compli-
mented for doing what was normal.
   However, as players, we knew we were rising to a greater
level when we’d see that little smile on his face. When four


                                                                           133
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




              Punishment invokes fear. I wanted a team whose
                  members were ﬁlled with pride, not fear.


         guys touched the ball in two seconds and the ﬁfth guy hit a
         lay-up, man, what a feeling!
             I’d look over and see a nod, a little wink of approval
         from my coach. I’m telling you a chill would run down my
         spine. He was saying in his own way, “You just went be-
         yond really good to being great.” Then he would blow his
         whistle and say, “Now do it again. Faster.”



         What It Means
              by Steve Jamison

         A leader has a simple mission: to get those under his or her
         supervision to work at their highest level of ability in ways


134
                                               12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




that best serve the team. Your skills as a leader who can mo-
tivate determine if and to what degree this occurs.
    There are times when severe censure or penalty may be
effective. Most often, however, a leader resorts to punish-
ment because he lacks an understanding of its
limitations as well as the skills necessary to          Give me 100
create motivation based on pride, not fear.             percent. You
    John Wooden came to the conclusion that            can’t make up
when choosing between the carrot and the              for a poor effort
stick as a motivational tool, the well-chosen          today by giving
carrot was almost always more powerful and              110 percent
long-lasting than the stick.                           tomorrow. You
    Common carrots in business include                 don’t have 110
money, of course, advancement, awards, recog-         percent. You only
nition, a corner ofﬁce, a more prominent role         have 100 percent,
on the team or in the organization. Carrots            and that’s what
come in many forms.                                   I want from you
    However, Coach Wooden believes there is              right now.
perhaps no stronger form of motivation—no
better carrot—than approval from someone an individual
truly respects, whose approval they seek.
    He explains it like this: “I prefer to give a ‘pat on the
back’ as a motivational tool, although sometimes the pat
must be a little lower and a little harder.”
    Sincere approval instills pride. Punishment invokes fear.
He wanted a team whose members were filled with pride
rather than fear.


                                                                       135
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             Pride in the team and its effort is a fundamental compo-
         nent of Competitive Greatness in the philosophy of John
         Wooden. Wise use of the carrot can facilitate this, especially
         in combination with prudent use of the stick.
             The fear and ill feelings that arise from intimidation,
         punishment, and cruel words—common practices with
         dictator-style leaders—have less power than sincere praise.
             It is very hard to inﬂuence in a positive and long-lasting
         way when you antagonize someone.


           My Perspective     |   by John Wooden


              ommendations and criticism exist, of course, within a
         C    framework of expectations—rules—regarding behav-
         ior from those in your organization.
             When I was just starting out, I had lots of rules and very
         few suggestions. The rules were spelled out in black and
         white, and so were the penalties for breaking them.
             When a player broke one of my rules, the punishment
         was automatic, enforced without discussion. And the pun-
         ishment was often severe; in retrospect, often too severe.
             Eventually I came to recognize that common sense is
         needed in deciding when and how penalties should be ap-
         plied. Over the years I changed from having lots of rules and
         few suggestions to lots of suggestions and fewer rules.
             To a large degree I replaced speciﬁc rules and penalties
         with strong suggestions and unspeciﬁed consequences. This


136
                                                    12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




gave me much greater discretion and allowed for more pro-
ductive responses to misbehavior.
    I came to believe as a coach and leader that if I con-
ducted myself in a manner that earned the respect of those
under my leadership, this same feeling would exist in them.
When it did, I would gain one of the most powerful leader-
ship tools available to a leader, namely, trust. Why? Because
with respect comes trust by those on the team.
    I tried hard to earn their respect and trust. Subsequently,
when I gave my nod of approval, a wink, a pat on the back,
it meant something. In fact, it meant a lot.




XXXXXXXOOOOOO
            COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


            THE CARROT IS MIGHTIER THAN A STICK

    •   The most effective carrot is often a respected leader’s
        praise. It creates pride.

    •   Don’t give praise if you don’t mean it. And even then
        don’t give it too often.

    •   The purpose of criticism is to correct, improve, and
        change; rarely to humiliate or embarrass.

    •   It is difﬁcult to effect positive change when you
        antagonize.




                                                                         137
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                 leadership Lesson # 9:
                     M ake Greatness
                 Ava i l a b l e to E v e ryon e

         What I Learned
              by Doug McIntosh
              UCLA varsity, 1964–66;
              two NCAA national championships

         “You can always do more than you think you can.” That’s the
         biggest thing I got from Coach Wooden’s teaching. There’s
         always more inside if you’re willing to work hard enough to
         bring it out.




138
                                                12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




    Most of the time we don’t recognize we
have great potential inside. Coach brought            Each member of
out the potential in people. He taught mental        your team has the
readiness: “Be ready and your chance may               potential for
come. If you are not ready, it may not come               personal
again.”                                                greatness; the
    Thus, he made me see there are no small           leader’s job is to
opportunities. Every opportunity is big. If              help them
you only play for two minutes, make it the               achieve it.
best two minutes possible.
    That’s your opportunity, whether in basketball or in life.
Be ready; make the most of it. It may not come again.



What It Means
     by Steve Jamison

John Wooden will not single out a “greatest UCLA player”
or “greatest UCLA team.” Who’s #1? He will not say be-
cause it runs contrary to his concept of success; speciﬁcally,
that personal greatness is measured against one’s own po-
tential, not that of someone else. Likewise, a team’s great-
ness is measured against itself and no other.
    He wanted the individuals under his supervision—players,
assistant coaches, student managers, the trainer—to under-
stand that the kind of greatness he sought and valued was
available to each and every one of them: “Give me the best
you’ve got. That’s all I ask.” Each member of the team


                                                                        139
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




            understood they could achieve greatness by doing what he
            asked. It was attainable by doing their job, fulfilling their
            role, at the highest level of their effort and ability. Success—
            Competitive Greatness—was available to everyone on every
            team ever coached by John Wooden.
                Coach Wooden asked a player such as Bill Walton to
            strive to achieve his own potential—his own greatness—just
                           as he wanted head manager Les Friedman to
                           seek his own personal best in doing the job
 “Make sure you”
                           assigned.
      can hold your
                               John Wooden recognized that Walton’s
      head up high
                           contribution to the team could be more valu-
 “after the game.”
                           able than that of the eighth man on the bench
      They all knew
                           or the head manager, but his true belief, deeply
        I wasn’t
                           felt, was that each individual under his super-
 talking about the
                           vision could achieve personal greatness. Bill
       ﬁnal score.
                           Walton might be more valuable and difﬁcult
                           to replace, but his potential for Competitive
            Greatness as measured by Coach Wooden was exactly the
            same for every individual on the team. This was a concept
            that he worked ceaselessly to instill in the minds of every-
            one he coached.
                When leaders instill the belief that the opportunity for
            personal greatness exists within every job, every role, and
            each person on the team, they will ﬁnd themselves in charge
            of extraordinary achievers and motivated and most produc-
            tive organizations.


140
                                                12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




      For this reason, Mr. Wooden has always been strongly
against retiring a player’s number because it, in effect, de-
clares a particular individual as the greatest at that position.
He feels this is dismissive of previous players who wore the
number and achieved their own personal greatness.



    My Perspective     |   by John Wooden


    stated the following very clearly in my teaching: “In what-
I   ever role I assign you, execute your responsibilities to the
very best of your ability.” Whether as a nonstarter or a star,
I called on each to seek his own potential, his own great-
ness, not that of someone else.
      For an organization to succeed, all members must achieve
personal greatness; each in their own role that helps the
team; each striving to give their job the best they have.
      When all members of an organization strive for personal
greatness and derive pride from the knowledge that their ef-
fort and performance contribute to the good of the group,
you will unleash most powerful and productive forces.
      Let the ambitious individual know that before advanc-
ing, they ﬁrst must do their assigned role to the best of their
ability. Let the overlooked individual better understand how
their job beneﬁts the team.
      Remind those under your leadership that patience is re-
quired, and if they continue to improve, their chance will


                                                                     141
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         come, often when least expected. I cautioned ambitious
         players, “Be ready when your opportunity arrives or it may
         not arrive again.”




         XXXXXXXOOOOOO
                    COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                  MAKE GREATNESS AVAILABLE TO EVERYONE

              •   A leader’s greatness is found in bringing out great-
                  ness in others.

              •   Personal greatness is measured—like success—
                  against one’s own potential, not that of someone
                  else.

              •   Opportunity for advancement comes unexpectedly.
                  Teach those you lead to be prepared for it when it
                  happens. And be patient.

              •   Before calculus comes arithmetic. Advancement
                  comes only with mastery of the assigned role and
                  responsibility within the organization.




                               An effective leader is
                              very good at listening.
                             And it’s difﬁcult to listen
                              when you are talking.


142
                                           12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




      leadership Lesson # 10:
    Seek Signific ant Change

What I Learned
     by Gary Cunningham
     UCLA varsity, 1960–62; assistant coach, UCLA,
     1966–75; head coach, UCLA, 1977, 1978.

John Wooden did not want “yes-men” around him. We were
encouraged to argue our points, knowing he’d come back at
us strong with his own opinions. That was his way of test-
ing how much we believed in what we were telling him and
how much we knew about it.
   For example, we’d debate the pivot—what was the best
way to do it—for 45 minutes during a morning meeting. But




                                                                143
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




            he listened with an open mind, let us contribute—insisted
            on it. During those meetings, we didn’t just sit and take
            notes. He wanted interaction, ideas back and forth. What
            changes can we make to improve our performance?
                And he got it.

                           What It Means
      Never make                  by Steve Jamison
      excuses. Your
                           At the beginning of the 1961–62 season, John
      friends don’t
                           Wooden had been coaching basketball at
  need them, and
                           UCLA for 12 years in conditions he describes
  your foes won’t
                           as “harsh, perhaps as bad as any major uni-
      believe them.
                           versity in the country.”
                                 The basketball facility at UCLA, the old
            Men’s Gym, was an environment that prevented good
            teaching: crowded with other sports activities during his
            practices, badly ventilated, without an area where he could
            instruct the team privately, and so small the team had to
            play “home games” at local junior colleges.
                When it came to assessing the possibility of winning a
            national championship, he felt there was no chance that
            UCLA would be able to go all the way. Too much was
            working against the Bruins. First and foremost, the “near-
            hardship” conditions at UCLA’s gym diminished his poten-
            tial for teaching.
                How did this all affect his perspective as a coach? While
            circumspect in describing it, he suggests that perhaps it lim-


144
                                              12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




ited his thinking regarding the potential results available to
his team in the national tournament. That is, winning a
championship was not possible. However, events in the
1961–62 season changed his viewpoint completely, removed
a subconscious barrier he may have imposed on himself, and
set change in motion that would eventually produce 10 na-
tional championships and a basketball dynasty
    What happened is a good lesson in how we can limit
ourselves without even knowing it—how we can say “no”
when we should be asking “how?”
    In 1961–62 the UCLA Bruins advanced to the Final Four
before losing in the final seconds to Cincinnati 72–70. A
“phantom foul” for charging was called on the Bruins and
Cincinnati gained possession of the ball and won the game.
    Coach Wooden recognized that despite the primitive
practice conditions at UCLA, the Bruins had come very
close to winning a national championship.
    This was a revelation. John Wooden recognized that it
was time to seek signiﬁcant change, to stop limiting his view
of what the team might accomplish.



  My Perspective     |   by John Wooden


      nce I realized that the Men’s Gym did not preclude
O     winning a national championship, it seemed to open
my mind, took the blinders off. I began an intense and


                                                                   145
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         comprehensive review of what I was doing and how I could
         do it better. I began searching for changes that would allow
         UCLA to consistently be more competitive in post-season
         play.
             On the plane ride back from the tournament loss against
         Cincinnati in Louisville, assistant coach Jerry Norman be-
         gan making his case as to why I should reconsider using a
         full court defense—the Press—in the upcoming season and
         beyond.
             I listened carefully to what he said, even though I had
         heard and ignored it in previous years. This time, for rea-
         sons related to our near-win against Cincinnati—having the
         blinders removed from my eyes—I was really listening, and
         instead of saying “no” I said “yes.” It was a significant
         change, and I made it.
             The Press ultimately became a trademark of UCLA bas-
         ketball and contributed to our run of championships.
             It took UCLA’s surprising appearance in the Final Four
         and a near-victory against Cincinnati for me to quit making
         excuses, to stop blaming the Men’s Gym for our results. I’m
         pleased that it happened. I am not pleased that it was nec-
         essary.



                               Make each day
                             your masterpiece.




146
                                                    12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




XXXXXXXOOOOOO
            COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                   SEEK SIGNIFICANT CHANGE

   •    Never be content with performance or results.

   •    Remove all excuses for getting to the next level. Don’t
        say “no”; ask “how?”

   •    A leader listens (especially to the leadership team).

   •    A robust exchange of ideas and opinions is healthy as
        long as it’s done in a manner that is not disruptive or
        disrespectful.




 Leadership Lesson # 11: Don’ t
   Look at the Scoreboard


What I Learned
       by Dave Meyers
       UCLA varsity; 1973–75;
       two NCAA national championships

As a pro with the Milwaukee Bucks, absolutely nothing else
mattered but winning. If you missed a shot or made a mis-
take, you were made to feel so terrible about it because all
eyes were on the scoreboard.


                                                                         147
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             On the other hand, Coach Wooden didn’t talk about
         winning—never. His message was to give the practice the
         best you’ve got; give the game the best you’ve got. “That’s
         the goal,” he would tell us. “Do that and you are a success.
         If enough of you do it, our team will be a success.” He
         teaches this, he believes it, and he taught me to believe it.
             Winning was not mentioned—never—only the effort,
         the preparation, doing what it takes to bring out your best in
         practice and games. Let winning take care of itself. And it did.



         What It Means
              by Steve Jamison

         John Wooden kept a sealed envelope in his UCLA ofﬁce that
         contained a slip of paper with predictions for game results




148
                                               12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




on it for the upcoming season. Those predictions, filled in
before the start of the season and filed away in a drawer,
were as close as he came to worrying about what the score-
board would show in future games; whether UCLA would
beat some other team.
    He wanted players to do likewise: to forget about the
scoreboard and focus on doing their job at the highest pos-
sible level in practice and in competition. The
score will take of itself. Focus on the present
                                                       You can’t do
effort, not the future result.
                                                      anything about
    An effective leader determines what occu-
                                                       yesterday, and
pies the organization’s attention, what those
                                                       the only way
individuals work on and worry about. This
                                                        to improve
process begins with what you, the leader, are
                                                      tomorrow is by
preoccupied with.
                                                       what you do
    The scoreboard? Championships? A sales
                                                         right now.
quota? The bottom line? As a day-to-day pre-
occupation, they’re a waste of time because
they steal attention and effort from the present and squan-
der it on the future. You control the former, not the latter.
    An organization—a team—that’s always looking up at
the scoreboard will ﬁnd that a worthy opponent will steal
the “ball” out from under you.
    Coach Wooden’s basic philosophy was to prepare for
each opponent in the same way; respect all, fear none, and
concentrate on teaching the Bruins to execute his system at




                                                                        149
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         their highest level. Teaching, learning, and execution are all
         done in the present moment. He says, “I didn’t think that
         talking about winning all the time would increase our
         chances of doing so.”
               Thus, he never scouted other teams because he believed
         the Bruins were better off letting the opponent do the scout-
         ing and constant changing. He felt the players under his su-
         pervision would be stronger doing the same thing over and
         over—his system executed at the highest possible standard—
         than trying to change each week depending on who the op-
         ponent might be. There were exceptions to this, of course,
         but very few.
               John Wooden focused almost entirely on improvement
         in the present moment. He let the score—winning—take
         care of itself.

                 Don’t let yesterday take up too much of today.


             My Perspective    |   by John Wooden


             f you want to extend a winning streak, forget about it. If
         I   you want to break a losing streak, forget about it. Forget
         about everything except concentrating on the very hard
         work and intelligent planning necessary for never-ending
         improvement. Don’t keep looking at the “scoreboard,” the
         won-lost record, or the ongoing results in whatever form they
         may take. It removes your mind from the most important


150
                                                    12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




task, namely, ﬁguring out how to improve the performance
of your organization. Whether you are ahead or behind, on
a winning streak or a losing streak, what matters most
is your focus on improvement. The “scoreboard” in all its
various forms is a siren that beckons, but only distracts and
diminishes our attention to incessantly seeking ways to im-
prove.
   As the leader, my job was to help each player accom-
plish this, in part, by getting them to block out the future,
the standings, or whatever they hoped the scoreboard might
show at the end of a game.
   It was a goal I never sealed in an envelope and filed
away in my desk.




XXXXXXXOOOOOOCOACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                DON’T LOOK AT THE SCOREBOARD

   •     Worry about today’s effort, not tomorrow’s results.

   •     Watching the “scoreboard” is habit-forming. Break
         the habit.

   •     Define your dreams, hopes, and aspirations. Then file
         them away.

   •     Focus on running the race rather than winning it.




                                                                         151
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                leadership Lesson # 12:
               Adversit y Is Your Asset


         What I Learned
              by Ken Washington
              UCLA varsity, 1964–66; two NCAA national
              championships

         The great lesson I take from Coach Wooden is this: the best
         thing you can do in life is your best. You’re a winner when
         you do that even if you’re on the short end of the score.
             Too many factors can affect the ﬁnal results; the ﬁckle
         ﬁnger of fate can suddenly take over. The best talent does-
         n’t always win, but the individual or team that goes out and




152
                                              12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




does their best is a winner. That’s his philosophy. It’s what
he teaches.
    We had a perfect season and won the national champi-
onship in 1964. We repeated as national champions in
1965. There was no question in my mind that in 1966 we
could become the ﬁrst team in college basketball history to
win three championships in a row. Then the
ﬁckle ﬁnger of fate pointed at us.
                                                        Be a competitor.
    Injuries, sickness, and all kinds of stuff
                                                        When the going
were hitting us. We didn’t even win our con-
                                                    gets tough, really
ference title in 1966—we had a 10–4 record
                                                           get going.
and weren’t even eligible to play in the NCAA
tournament and defend our title.
    Through all of the misfortune, I never heard a single
complaint or excuse from Coach Wooden. He fought hard
and kept telling us to keep working, never give up, do our
best. And we did in spite of the ﬁckle ﬁnger of fate.
    We were a success in 1966 because of that.

What It Means
     by Steve Jamison

Welcome adversity. It can make you stronger, better, tougher.
Your competition will be tested too. The prize goes to the
competitor who best deals with adversity. This starts by not
blaming your troubles on bad luck. Blaming fate—bad
luck—makes you weaker. Good things come only through
adversity. Good leaders understand this.


                                                                        153
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                Fate plays a role in leadership. Circumstances we nei-
             ther foresee, understand, nor desire can be imposed without
             warning on us and our organizations in what seems to be a
             random fashion.
                In trying times it is easy to feel the fates are working di-
             rectly against you—to find an excuse to let up, lose heart,
             then quit.
                You do not control the unwelcome twists and turns that
             are part of life and leadership. At those difﬁcult moments,
             Coach Wooden drew strength from his father’s strong ex-
             ample as well as his suggestion to worry only about those
             things over which you have control. We can’t control fate,
             only our response to it.
                Time and time again, fate intervened in his career. He
             believes the following: “Things turn out best for those who
                           make the best of the way things turn out.” He
                           did this in 1947 when a freak snowstorm pre-
  Things turn out
                           vented ofﬁcials at the University of Minnesota
      best for those
                           from calling him to offer the head coaching
      who make the
                           job of the Minnesota Gophers. This was a job
  best of the way
                           he wanted very much.
  things turn out.
                               Instead, he went to UCLA and under
                           “near-hardship conditions” won two national
             championships at the old Men’s Gym, which led to eight
             more titles at Pauly Pavilion. Similarly, when the rules were
             changed, making the dunk illegal in college basketball and
             thus taking away a major offensive weapon available to


154
                                                12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Coach Wooden counseled him with
this advice: “It can make you better, a more complete
player.” Result? Abdul-Jabbar’s legendary sky-hook.
    When knocked down by fate, a strong leader stands,
takes a deep breath, and looks to make the best of the situ-
ation. They develop the ability to see adversity as usually of-
fering a well-hidden blessing, an opportunity in disguise.



  My Perspective     |   by John Wooden


    arly on I had come to believe that events in life usually
E   work out as they should, for a reason, even if that rea-
son is not apparent. Perhaps it was because of my faith or
the example of my parents. Perhaps because of my own ex-
periences along the way. I don’t know exactly why, but I be-
gan to better accept what fate seemed to offer and tried to
make the very best of the situation, to move forward with
optimism and the determination to make the most of the sit-
uation.
    Those who prevail in a competitive environment look
fate in the eye and say, “Welcome.” Then they move ahead
without complaint, excuse, or whining.
    It is inevitable in leadership and in life that events occur
that seem utterly incomprehensible and unfair. While we
can’t control fate, we can control how we react to the hand
we’re dealt.


                                                                     155
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             In leadership, your reaction is crucial because the team
         will follow your example.
             Be a realistic optimist and remind yourself that things turn
         out best for those who make the best of how things turn out.




         XXXXXXXOOOOOO
                     COACH WOODEN’S X’S AND O’S:


                            ADVERSITY IS YOUR ASSET

             •   All leaders and their organizations are visited by misfor-
                 tune and bad luck. You will not be the exception to the
                 rule.

             •   “Woe is me” is not the theme song of an effective leader.

             •   Adversity makes us stronger, but only if we resist the
                 temptation to blame fate for our troubles.

             •   How often have you not recognized an opportunity be-
                 cause it wore the disguise of bad luck?




                         Goals achieved with little effort
                     are seldom worthwhile or long-lasting.




156
                                             12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




     C O M P A S S                    C H E C K

          LEADERSHIP LESSON #1
GOOD VALUES ATTRACT GOOD PEOPLE

1. You are a leader. What are your top three core values
  as a leader?




                                                                  157
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             2. Describe three actions you will take to better
               communicate, make visible, and/or demonstrate your
               leadership values. Remember, you are a teacher
               rather than a “preacher.” What is the difference?




158
                                                12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




3. List the top three characteristics, that is, values, you
   look for in a potential team member, and describe
   how you identify them in that individual and how you
   expect that candidate to identify them in you.




                                                                     159
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                       LEADERSHIP LESSON #2
                      USE THE MOST POWERFUL
                          FOUR-LETTER WORD


             1. Describe your philosophy on personal relationships
               with team members as it compares with Coach
               Wooden’s “extended family” approach.




160
                                            12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




2. List three actions—small gestures—you will take to
  demonstrate your “sincere care, concern, and
  consideration” for other team members.




                                                                 161
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             3. Describe a leader you have worked with in the past
               who demonstrated Coach Wooden’s “extended
               family” perspective. Be speciﬁc in explaining the
               positive impact it had on you, how it was
               accomplished, and what application you might
               use in your own work.




162
                                             12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




         LEADERSHIP LESSON #3
       CALL YOURSELF A TEACHER


1. Before you can teach, you must know what you want
  to teach. In general terms, describe what you are trying
  to teach in your leadership position.




                                                                  163
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             2. Describe your greatest asset as a leader/teacher and
               your greatest weakness.




164
                                             12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




3. What three actions will you take to improve your
  teaching? (For example, convening a monthly “open
  forum” where those on your team can ask questions
  and learn from your experience.)




                                                                  165
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                       LEADERSHIP LESSON #4
                      EMOTION IS YOUR ENEMY


             1. John Wooden teaches that intensity is productive and
               emotionalism counterproductive. Explain how Coach
               Wooden deﬁnes and distinguishes these two important
               behaviors, and reﬂect on your own perspective vis-à-
               vis these behaviors.




166
                                             12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




2. Recall an occasion on which you went from intensity
  to emotionalism. Describe what caused your
  “temperature” to go up and what you did or would
  do to prevent the escalation from recurring.




                                                                  167
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             3. Self-Control, especially in the context of emotions, but
               not limited to it, is a John Wooden fundamental for
               Success. Identify those areas of your performance
               and behavior that typically lack solid discipline,
               structure, or self-will. Describe what actions you
               would take to improve.




168
                                              12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




          LEADERSHIP LESSON #5
             IT TAKES 10 HANDS
             TO SCORE A BASKET


1. Describe a situation in which you or someone on the
  team was not a “10 hands” team member and put
  self-interest ahead of the interests of the group.
  Describe a situation when the opposite occurred.




                                                                   169
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             2. What was the best “10 hands” team you were ever on,
               and what lessons from that experience will you seek
               to incorporate in the weeks ahead?




170
                                              12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




3. Describe in detail three actions you will implement to
  encourage others to “share the ball”—information,
  ideas, and opportunities.




                                                                   171
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                       LEADERSHIP LESSON #6
                          LITTLE THINGS MAKE
                          BIG THINGS HAPPEN


             1. Describe a failure “on your watch” that resulted from
               sloppy attention to details.




172
                                                12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




2. List three areas of “details” that you will focus on with
   greater emphasis in the weeks ahead. Describe how
   you will teach this habit of caring about details to your
   team.




                                                                     173
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             3. Identify a detail that John Wooden stressed that has
               application in your leadership. Describe how you will
               incorporate it. [For a complete description of his
               assiduous identiﬁcation and perfection of details, refer
               to Wooden on Leadership (McGraw-Hill).]




174
                                            12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




          LEADERSHIP LESSON #7
 MAKE EACH DAY YOUR MASTERPIECE


1. List several “Coach Quotes” to share with your team.
  What would be some appropriate opportunities to
  remind and reinforce their meaning to your team?
  What relevant quotes are there from other leaders you
  respect? What can be incorporated into your
  teaching?




                                                                 175
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             2. By his description, John Wooden was as good as any
               coach in the country in his management/organization
               of time. Analyze your own management of time.
               Describe in detail how you can improve speciﬁc areas.




176
                                              12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




3. Reﬂect in a meaningful manner on the responsibilities
  and trust incumbent on you as a leader. Ask yourself,
  “In what speciﬁc ways am I honoring this trust?” Ask
  yourself, “In what ways have I fallen short of creating
  ‘a masterpiece’ in my leadership?”




                                                                   177
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                       LEADERSHIP LESSON #8
                      THE CARROT IS MIGHTIER
                               THAN A STICK


             1. Identify a number of instances when you have offered
               praise or criticism. Give thought to the ratio of praise
               to criticism as well as the total number of instances.
               What are your conclusions?




178
                                              12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




2. The “carrot” is powerful. List current and new creative
  “carrots” you will incorporate in your leadership
  methodology.




                                                                   179
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             3. Describe how you might create a monthly Pyramid of
               Success award for a team member who best exhibits
               a speciﬁc characteristic you have selected (e.g.,
               Initiative).




180
                                             12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




          LEADERSHIP LESSON #9
      MAKE GREATNESS AVAILABLE
                   TO EVERYONE


1. Evaluate your actions and effectiveness in teaching
  each member of your team the importance of the
  individual’s job as it pertains to the group’s success—
  especially for those in lesser roles.




                                                                  181
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             2. Identify deserving team members who have achieved
               Competitive Greatness at work. What do you think
               their performance perspectives on doing their job
               would be?




182
                                            12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




3. Using Coach Wooden’s 12 Lessons in Leadership,
  identify and discuss a personalized “lesson” that you
  could share with your team on a monthly basis.
  Describe how you will make each lesson a reality;
  include speciﬁc examples as to how this lesson can
  be put to good use by you and your team during each
  particular month.




                                                                 183
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                      LEADERSHIP LESSON #10
                     SEEK SIGNIFICANT CHANGE


             1. Describe a plan that will encourage and reward team
               members for input, even “out of the box” ideas.




184
                                             12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




2. How will you create opportunities for “brain-storming”
  sessions in which current practices, behaviors, and
  more are examined and improved.




                                                                  185
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             3. List three leaders you will contact in the next several
                months with an eye toward gaining insights into their
                leadership philosophy and methodology.




186
                                            12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




         LEADERSHIP LESSON #11
   DON’T LOOK AT THE SCOREBOARD


1. John Wooden virtually removed the “ﬁnal score” as
  the ﬁnal goal. Describe how you can incorporate his
  philosophy into your own job and convey it to those
  with whom you work.




                                                                 187
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             2. Coach Wooden found his greatest joy in the journey,
               the day-to-day process of improvement. Describe
               your own perspective on the process. Write down a
               summary of where you ﬁnd the joy in your professional
               journey. What in Coach Wooden’s perspective can
               you bring into your own approach?




188
                                            12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




3. Discuss three actions you would take to increase
  team focus on improvement while diminishing in a
  productive manner constant “scoreboard” checking.




                                                                 189
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                      LEADERSHIP LESSON #12
                     ADVERSITY IS YOUR ASSET


             1. Give an example of a setback, accident, or failure that
               was turned into an advantage. What did you learn from
               the experience?




190
                                            12 LESSONS IN LEADERSHIP




2. Create a step-by-step formula for responding to
  setbacks, losses, or poor performance that ensures
  a measured and productive response.




                                                                 191
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             3. Examine your personal experiences for examples of
               “adversity becomes an asset.” What patterns, if any,
               do you discern, and how can you incorporate them in
               the future?




192
     PA R T   I V



REFLECTIONS
ON
LEADERSHIP
This page intentionally left blank
 50 M axims and Observations
         on leadership


Ability may get you to the top,
but it takes character to stay there.

    Leaders often change when success arrives. Some be-
    gin to believe that what got them to the top is enough
    to stay there. It isn’t. Complacency is a character issue.



When you’re through
learning, you’re through.

    Learning is a leader’s lifetime pursuit. You must never
    reach the point of self-delusion that suggests you know
    it all. Remind yourself, “It’s what I learn after I know it
    all that counts.” It’s the truth.



The journey is better than the inn.

    Cervantes, with those words, sums up my perspective on
    trophies, championships, and other “rewards”; namely,
    they are secondary—a by-product of the journey itself,
    the process of striving for personal greatness. For me,
    a victory on the court—“being better than someone


                                                                  195
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                  else”—can be satisfying. What precedes it, however,
                  can bring joy and the greatest self-satisfaction. The
                  joys of the journey exceed the comforts of the inn.


                           If you’re not making mistakes,
                           you’re not doing anything.

                                Coach “Piggy” Lambert told me at Pur-
                                due University, “The team that makes
                                the most mistakes probably wins.” The
                                doer makes mistakes. However, be sure
                                your mistakes are not the result of poor
  It’s important to
                                preparation or sloppy execution. Win-
 keep trying to do
                                ners make the right kind of mistakes.
  what you think
 is right, no matter
                           Do not let what you can’t do
      how hard it is
                           interfere with what you can do.
 or how often you
      fail. You never           When you allow yourself to get caught
       stop trying.             up in things over which you have no con-
                                trol, it affects those things over which
                  you do have control. Time is limited. Focus on that
                  which you can improve, correct, or change. Ignore what
                  you can’t control.


             Failure to act is often the biggest failure of all.

                  “Tentative” is a word I do not associate with Compet-
                  itive Greatness. The leader who is afraid to face failure


196
                                           REFLECTIONS ON LEADERSHIP




    will seldom face Success. You must have the courage
    to make a decision and then execute expeditiously.


Little things make big things happen.

    Success is built from the ground up. I showed players
    how to put their sweat socks on correctly. Small things—
    laughable to some—are connected to big things such
    as a national championship. The particulars may dif-
    fer for you and your team, but success is built from the
    bottom up.


The best way to improve the
team is to improve yourself.

    We become so intent on improving the performance
    level of others that we neglect our own shortcomings.
    Honest self-evaluation is the ﬁrst and often most difﬁ-
    cult step in a leader’s own improvement.


You are not a failure until you start
blaming others for your mistakes.

    Time spent complaining is time wasted. The leader is
    responsible for the team’s performance. The moment
    you seek to set responsibility on the doorstep of an-
    other, you have deluded yourself. Self-delusion is self-
    destruction.


                                                                 197
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




            The force of character is cumulative.

                 Those words by Ralph Waldo Emerson can be put this
                 way: “Birds of a feather ﬂock together.” A leader with
                 character attracts people with character. They become
                 a team that is formidable under ﬁre.



       “For maximum team accomplishment, each individual must
  prepare himself to the best of his ability and then put his talent to
  work for the team. This must be done unselﬁshly, without thought
      of personal glory. When no one worries about who will receive
  the credit, far more can be accomplished in any group activity.”
                 —Preseason Letter to the Team, 1964



            The main ingredient of stardom
            is the rest of the team.

                 I’m asked, “Coach Wooden, how did you win all those
                 championships?” My response is factual: “I didn’t win
                 all those championships. Our team did.” In 27 years at
                 UCLA, I didn’t score a single basket. My job was to
                 help others do it. The star of the team is your team.

            Nobody cares how much you know
            until they know how much you care.

                 Care, concern, and a sincere consideration for those in
                 your organization is the mark of a strong leader. These


198
                                            REFLECTIONS ON LEADERSHIP




    traits do not make you appear weak, soft, or vulnera-
    ble. On the contrary, they are perceived by those you
    lead as a sign of self-conﬁdence. Be conﬁdent enough
    to care. And to show it.



Don’t mistake activity for achievement.

    To produce results, tasks must be well organized and
    properly executed; otherwise, it’s no different from chil-
    dren running around the playground—everybody is
    doing something, but nothing is being done; lots of ac-
    tivity, no achievement.



Discipline yourself and others won’t need to.

    Some leaders ﬁnd it easier to enforce rules and regula-
    tions on others than on themselves. How can you con-
    trol your team if you can’t control yourself? A team
    with discipline begins with a well-disciplined leader.
    I’ve never seen it work the opposite way.



“Love” is the greatest word in the English
language. “Balance” is the second-greatest word.

    Body balance is crucial for a basketball player. Emo-
    tional balance is crucial for everyone. Balance in life is
    necessary for optimal performance in leadership. 24/7


                                                                  199
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                  is necessary on occasion, but as a way of life, it means
                  you’re out of balance. Someone or something that is
                  out of balance is likely to fall over and break.


         “I must caution you that you cannot live in the past. The
      1971–72 season is now history, and we must look toward the
      future. The past cannot change what is to come. The work that
      you do each and every day is the only true way to improve and
       prepare yourself for what is to come. You cannot change the
      past, but you can inﬂuence the future by what you do today.”
                 —Preseason Letter to the Team, 1972



             A leader has one team, not
             “starters” and “substitutes.”

                  I tried hard to avoid cliques or any kind of caste sys-
                  tem at UCLA. If a starter referred to a nonstarter as a
                  “sub,” he’d be on the bench. The “sub” would have
                  his job while the starter learned his lesson. Favoritism
                  is fatal.



             Failing to prepare is preparing to fail.

                  My deﬁnition of success states that you must make the
                  utmost effort to bring forth your talent. This is how
                  you prepare to win. Do otherwise and you are simply
                  preparing to fail.


200
                                             REFLECTIONS ON LEADERSHIP




If you have done your job in preparing
the team, the team is prepared to do its
job in playing the game. So let them.

    I honestly felt that if I’d been successful in my teaching
    at practice during the week, I could watch the game
    from the stands on Saturday and the players would do
    just fine. Teach your team what to do, and then let
    them do it.



Be quick, but don’t hurry.

    Expect hustle from those under your supervision, but
    caution them not to expedite at a pace that increases
    the chance of errors. I prize quickness in execution of
    tasks, but not a pace so hurried that mistakes are likely.



No written word nor spoken plea can
teach your team what it should be.

    The most effective teaching tool is the power of your
    example—for better or worse. A leader who exhibits
    hustle, efﬁciency, fairness, courage, skill, and other pos-
    itive characteristics will see that reﬂected in the organ-
    ization. Of course, some of those on the team won’t
    reﬂect these things. You must then do the right thing:
    help them ﬁnd another team.


                                                                   201
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




      The past cannot change what is to come. The work that you do
      each and every day is the only true way to improve and prepare
      yourself for what is to come. You cannot change the past, and
         you can only inﬂuence the future by what you do today.
                 —Preseason Letter to the Team, 1968




             Perfection of relevant
             details is silly to some,
             but it’s not funny to me.

                  Races are won by a fraction of a second; national
                  championship games by a single point. That fraction
                  of a second or single point is the result of relevant de-
                  tails perfected along the way. Leave nothing to chance.
                  The difference between the championship team and a
                  merely good team is the perfection and execution of
                  relevant details. Sloppiness breeds sloppiness.



             The infection of
             success is often fatal.

                  Most people work harder on the way to the top than
                  when they arrive. If you’re fortunate enough to get
                  there, do not be swayed. Allow success to turn your
                  head and you’ll be looking failure right in the face.




202
                                          REFLECTIONS ON LEADERSHIP




More often than we ever suspect,
the lives of others we do affect.

    Leadership is a trust—a sacred trust, in my opinion. It
    goes beyond meeting quotas or winning a basketball
    game. You have the opportunity to change a person’s
    life by helping him or her become the best he or she is
    capable of becoming.


Define “normal” as “abnormally high.”

    The list was entitled “Normal Expectations.” It in-
    cluded “Never waste time”; “Never be selﬁsh, jealous,
    envious, or egotistical”; “Keep emotions under control
    without losing fight or aggressiveness”; “Work con-
    stantly to improve without becoming satisfied”;
    “Never expect favors”; “Never have reason to be sorry
    afterward”; “Acquire peace of mind by becoming the
    best that you are capable of becoming”; “Be on time”;
    and more. These were just my normal expectations for
    those under my supervision.


Play to win, but play fair.

    Is there a difference between robbing a bank for
    money and breaking the rules to win? Neither means
    much except to a thief. Cheating to win doesn’t make




                                                                203
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                 you a winner. How you play the game does count—at
                 least to me. Don’t envy those with ill-gotten gains,
                 whether it be money, fame, or victory.


      You must discipline yourself to do what is expected of you for
  the welfare of the team. The coach has many decisions to make,
      and you will not agree with all of them, but you must respect
          and accept them. Without supervision and leadership
       and a disciplined effort by all, much of our united strength
        will be dissipated pulling against ourselves. Let us not be
                victimized by a breakdown from within.
                 —Preseason Letter to the Team, 1965



            The will to win means nothing
            without the will to work.

                 I told those under my supervision, “Don’t tell me what
                 you will do. Show me.” Talking about hard work is a
                 lot easier than working hard. I sought individuals who
                 played “tall” more than individuals who were tall.


            You cannot antagonize and
            influence at the same time.

                 Leadership involves the task of inﬂuencing others in a
                 positive way: ﬁrst of all, those on your team. How can
                 you accomplish this if you annoy, irritate, and alienate


204
                                           REFLECTIONS ON LEADERSHIP




    those you wish to influence? I was often critical of
    players, but I tried hard to avoid personal attacks, em-
    barrassment, or demeaning comments, which would
    make them less likely to take my criticism to heart.



Learn as if you were to live forever;
live as if you were to die tomorrow.

    Be voracious in your daily desire to acquire knowl-
    edge, information, and wisdom. Be joyful and appre-
    ciative of the blessing of this day you’ve been given.



Happiness begins where selfishness ends.

    Selﬂessness is the start of a happy team. Individual sta-
    tistics have value only in regard to how they beneﬁt the
    group. A team member who hoards information, con-
    tacts, knowledge, the “ball”—at the expense of the
    group—hurts the group.



Fear is short-term; pride lasts.

    Instilling fear is a quick and easy way to motivate
    someone. It won’t last for long with talented people.
    Create pride with meaningful praise, sincere interest,
    and selfless dedication to the team. Fear has a place.
    Pride has ﬁrst place.


                                                                 205
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




       If I do not feel there is a place where you can contribute,
      I would not want to waste your time, and if you do not feel
       that you are part of the team as a whole, then you should
         drop out. Although I prefer to go too far with a play
        rather than not far enough, I will drop you when I feel
               certain that you are wasting your time.”
               —Preseason Letter to the Team, 1967




           There is no such thing
           as an overachiever.

                Regardless of our individual talent, we’re all under-
                achievers to different degrees. In 40 years of coaching,
                I never asked a player to give me 110 percent. I always
                held to the belief that 100 percent was plenty. In fact, it
                was everything.



           Do not be vulnerable to praise
           or criticism from outsiders.

                Your strength of consistency depends on how you let
                praise and criticism affect you. Some of it will be de-
                served and some of it will be undeserved. Either way,
                don’t get caught up in the opinions of others. When
                you are honest in your self-analysis, your opinion
                should count the most.


206
                                           REFLECTIONS ON LEADERSHIP




If you don’t have time to do it right,
when will you have time to do it over?

    In a competitive environment, you will face an over-
    whelming number of issues that need to be dealt with
    right now. Thus, it is easy to get sloppy, to give less
    than total attention to the task at hand. It is better to
    do one thing correctly than ten poorly. Don’t be the
    leader who gets a lot done, but nothing done well.


I will get ready, and then,
perhaps, my chance will come.

    Those under my supervision were cautioned to prepare
    for the chance to prove themselves: “Be ready and
    your opportunity may come. But if you’re not ready, it
    may not come again.” The same applies to those who
    aspire to higher levels of leadership. You must prepare
    before opportunity knocks. It seldom knocks twice.


Be more interested in finding the best way,
not in having it your way.

    A healthy ego—necessary in leadership—often inﬂates.
    You suddenly have all the answers and say, “It’s my way
    or the highway.” When this occurs, you’ll find some
    very talented people in your organization taking the
    highway just because they couldn’t get a fair hearing.


                                                                 207
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




      There is much truth in Kipling’s “Law of the Jungle” where he
      says, “The strength of the pack is the wolf, and the strength of
       the wolf is the pack.” If you discipline yourself toward team
      effort under the supervision of the coach, even though you may
        not always agree with my decisions, much can and will be
  accomplished. As someone once said, “You will be amazed at how
      much can be accomplished if no one cares who gets the credit.”
                 —Preseason Letter to the Team, 1927



             Make sure those under your supervision feel
             they are working with you, not for you.

                  “All for one and one for all” also applies to the leader.
                  At UCLA, I sincerely believed we were all working
                  together—the players, the assistant coaches, the
                  trainer, the managers. For best results, everyone must
                  feel they are working with everyone else. Seek the right
                  way, not just having it your way.


             Goals achieved with little effort are
             seldom worthwhile or long-lasting.

                  When nothing is at stake, few compete or care for the
                  results. Take comfort when the field is crowded with
                  worthy opponents. It means you’re in a battle that
                  matters. A great competitor loves the hard battle. Only
                  the worthy opponent brings out your best.


208
                                            REFLECTIONS ON LEADERSHIP




    Come in and talk to me whenever you feel like it, but please
   remember that it isn’t necessarily lack of communication if we
  fail to agree on your position or another individual on the team.
       I am and will always be interested in your problems,
    but I do feel that everyone should do everything possible to
   work out their own problems rather than become dependent
     upon others. I have found prayer most helpful when I am
  troubled, and I believe that all prayers are heard and answered,
               even though the answer may be “no.”
              —Preseason Letter to the Team, 1972



Time spent getting even is best spent getting ahead.

    “Sharp elbows” in basketball means a player is overly
    aggressive, throwing his elbows around. The player
    who gets hit in the head and tries to retaliate is usually
    called for the foul. “Forget it,” I would say in practice.
    “Get even by scoring.” Regardless of who’s throwing
    the “elbows,” it’s tough to forget about it when you
    get hit. Get even by winning.


There is nothing stronger than gentleness.

    Dictator-style leaders rule by fear and force, humilia-
    tion and intimidation. These are the same “leadership”
    tools used by a prison guard. You achieve better results
    with talented people when you treat them like human


                                                                     209
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




              beings. The most powerful motivator is a compliment
              from someone you respect. It’s true for you, and it’s
              true for those under your supervision.


         Be slow to criticize. Be quick to commend.

              Many leaders ﬁnd it easier to be negative than positive,
              to criticize rather than commend. It’s just a bad habit.
              However, when criticism was necessary, as it often was,
              I tried to say something positive first—then the criti-
              cism. I believe the greatest motivator is a pat on the
              back, although sometimes that “pat” must be a little
              lower and a little harder.


         Much more can be accomplished when
         no one is concerned about who gets credit.

              Selflessness means putting others—the team and its
              goals—ﬁrst, ahead of one’s own glory or statistics. It’s
              among the most valuable qualities an individual can
              bring to the team. If a player didn’t come by it naturally,
              I taught them how. The bench was my teaching tool.


         Agree to disagree without being disagreeable.

              The path to improvement has enough obstacles. A
              leader makes it more difficult by being surly, con-
              tentious, and disagreeable. Control this in yourself;
              prohibit it in others. A bad attitude is contagious.


210
                                           REFLECTIONS ON LEADERSHIP




You must earn the right to
be proud and confident.
    On the occasion when UCLA had won a national
    championship the preceding year, I would start the
    new season off with these words: “Do not feel that
    anything that happened last year should have any
    bearing on this year. You must establish your own
    identity.” I wanted them to understand clearly that
    they could not assume the championship identity of
    the previous team. They had to earn it themselves.

Give credit to those who do little jobs in a big way.
    Everybody likes some attention. In basketball or busi-
    ness, there are big producers who get all the notice and
    acclaim. At press conferences, I countered this by di-
    recting attention to those who helped the “big pro-
    ducer” produce so much. A leader is wise to remember
    that a big producer is assisted by a big team.


                                                                 211
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




            You can’t make up for poor effort
            today by working harder tomorrow.

                 We kid ourselves: “I’ll buckle down to business tomor-
                 row and work twice as hard.” No. If you can work
                 “twice as hard” tomorrow, it means you’ve been hold-
                 ing something back, not giving 100 percent today. I
                 want 100 percent today and tomorrow.


      My experience in teaching and coaching over many years has
  naturally caused me to become somewhat opinionated in certain
      areas, but even most of those who are inexperienced will agree
      that experience is a great, although sometimes hard, teacher.”
                 —Preseason Letter to the Team, 1967



            Heed this observation: “Others, too, have brains.”

                 A leader listens. Don’t act like you’re listening when
                 you’re just waiting to talk. People know when you’re
                 not hearing what they say. Sometimes we forget that
                 we’re not the only smart person in the room.


            Don’t measure yourself by what you’ve
            accomplished, but by what you should
            have accomplished with your abilities.

                 The contest is within, to bring out your best. That’s the
                 ultimate challenge and responsibility. Measure your


212
                                            REFLECTIONS ON LEADERSHIP




    success on the basis of how close you got to realizing
    your full potential.



Consider the rights of others before
your own feelings, and the feelings
of others before your own rights.

    Consideration for the rights and feelings of others is a
    small price to pay for the great goodwill that will be re-
    turned to you.



The smallest good deed is better
than the biggest intention.

    The greatest gift means nothing if it’s not given. Don’t
    let procrastination make you its partner in doing
    nothing.



A leader must have courage,
including the courage to change.

    We must fight for what we believe in—up to a point.
    Remember this bit of verse: “Stubbornness we depre-
    cate / Firmness we condone / The former is my neigh-
    bor’s trait / The latter is my own.”


                                                                  213
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             Things turn out best for those who make
             the best of the way things turn out.

                  The ancient proverb says, “Crisis presents opportu-
                  nity.” It is the opportunity to dig deeper and rise higher;
                  to get stronger and be smarter; to ﬁnd a better way, a
                  different path. Adversity offers the opportunity, but
                  you must recognize it.




        It has been almost four months since our basketball season
        came to a close. It was a very successful season [UCLA had
       won its sixth national championship in seven years], but it is
        now history and we must look toward the future. The past
       cannot change what is to come. It is what you do today that
      counts, and I sincerely hope that you are looking forward to an
      outstanding 1970–71 season and are eager, not just willing, to
       make the necessary personal sacriﬁces to reach that goal. All
      worthwhile accomplishments require sacriﬁce and hard work.”
                 —Preseason Letter to the Team, 1970




214
      PA R T   V



A Leadership
Reality
Check
This page intentionally left blank
You will m ake no progress
 without self-awareness.


 1. As a leader, what is the most gratifying praise you
   could hear from a member of your team?




              Be slow to criticize and
                quick to commend.



 2. What criticism of your leadership would be most
   painful to hear?




                                                          217
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




              3. What aspect of leadership do you love the most?




              4. What is your greatest fear as a leader?




                               The best way to
                           improve the team is to
                            improve yourselves.



              5. What single characteristic do you possess as a
                leader that someone would be well-served to
                emulate? Your most valuable asset?




218
                                     A LEADERSHIP REALITY CHECK




6. What characteristic do you exhibit that a potential
  leader would be wise to avoid?




7. If you wrote a book about your life and leadership,
  what would the title be? And the subtitle?




8. To this point, what is your greatest achievement as
  a leader?




                                                            219
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




              9. What single personal asset would you like to
                acquire as part of your leadership skill set?




            10. Which leader—outside of your company—do you
                identify with?




            11. What trait do you most deplore in individuals?




            12. What trait do you most dislike in yourself as a leader?




220
                                         A LEADERSHIP REALITY CHECK




13. What is the most overrated virtue associated with
    leaders?




14. What is the most underrated characteristic
    associated with leadership?




                   Time spent getting
               even would be better spent
                  trying to get ahead.



15. What is your greatest regret as a leader?




                                                                221
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




            16. What part of leadership do you dislike most?




            17. If you could change one thing you did as a leader,
                what would it be?




            18. What is your response to team failure—coming up
                short?




            19. If you were to die and come back as a leader in any
                occupation—business, military, religion, education,
                or otherwise—what would it be and why?




222
                                         A LEADERSHIP REALITY CHECK




          Ability may get you to the top,
        but it takes character to stay there.



20. Which sports leader, present company excluded,
    do you most admire and why?




21. What, if anything, is inhibiting or stopping you
    from becoming the kind of leader you envision
    yourself being?




22. What is your deﬁnition of failure?




                                                                223
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




            23. What is your deﬁnition of success?




            24. What do you consider the four most important
                values for leadership?




            25. What do you consider the four most important
                values in those you lead?




224
    PA R T   V I




Wooden’s
Tea m
This page intentionally left blank
               COACH WOODEN’S
               FIELD OF DREA MS

     Kareem Abdul-Jabbar: UCLA varsity, 1967–69;
     three NCAA national championships

You may have seen the Kevin Costner movie Field of
Dreams—“Build it and they will come.” Coach Wooden did
that. He built his basketball program a certain way—
athletically, ethically, morally—because he believed it would
attract a certain type of person, the kind of individual he
wanted on the team.
   And if he didn’t have success that way, it was all right
with him because he felt his program made sense; in every
way it made sense to him. So he was going to do it that way.
Coach was almost a mystic in knowing what would hap-
pen. And, he was right—when he built it, they came. I was
one of them.
   I chose UCLA in large part because of what I saw and
heard regarding those values. Dr. Ralph Bunche and Jackie
Robinson wrote to me saying UCLA was a great place for
an education and athletics. Willie Naulls told me that race
wasn’t an issue with Coach Wooden.
   And one of the most important things in my decision
was seeing Rafer Johnson on the Ed Sullivan Show. I knew
he was a world-class athlete, but he was on the show as


                                                                227
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         president of the student body at UCLA. That told me the
         school appreciated him for more than just being a jock. It
         told me a whole lot about what UCLA was about.
             With his hair parted in the middle, Coach looked like he
         fell off a box of Pepperidge Farm cookies. That was mislead-
         ing. In the gym he was a very, very tough man, extremely
         demanding. He wanted it done a certain way, and he would
         get out there and demonstrate what that way was.
             Coach was about 57 years old when I arrived at UCLA—
         almost 40 years older than the rest of us. But he would never
         ask his players to do what he wouldn’t do. You appreciate
         that, when the leader is willing to get right out there and
         work alongside you. You’re not just hearing stuff from some-
         body who hasn’t been there and done it. He knew what he
         was talking about, so he had that credibility. He got respect.
             Winning was never mentioned by him. For Coach
         Wooden it was, “Fellas, we’ve got to play at our best. Let’s
         do that.” That’s a lot different from saying, “Fellas, we’ve got
         to win.” A lot different.
             Race? Religion? They didn’t matter. What mattered was
         the effort you made on the court and in the classroom.
         What mattered was your behavior, your conduct, your val-
         ues. Of course, that included a strong work ethic.
             He wanted our best effort. If that wasn’t good enough,
         he accepted the results. Coach Wooden ﬁgured maybe that’s
         the way it’s supposed to be. But he wanted our best effort




228
                                                        WOODEN’S TEAM




before he’d be willing to say, “That’s the way it’s supposed
to be.”
   By the second week of practice at UCLA, I was just to-
tally hooked on how he did things—the progression of skills
he had us work on and then putting it all together as a team.
   When they outlawed the dunk, he told me, “Lewis,
everybody will be playing under the same rules no matter
what they are. This game isn’t about the dunk shot. So just
go on and play; it’s the same for everybody.” Very matter of
fact. Mentally, I got past the rule change outlawing the dunk
shot very quickly.
   One of his strongest assets as a leader was his patience.
A lot of players were skeptical about various things, and it
would take a while to win them over. Coach would let them
try it their way and fail. He was good at that. It’s the best
way to teach. Because after they failed, they wanted to
know how to do it right. They wanted to learn how to do it
right more than they wanted to prove Coach wrong.
   So, here’s this 57-year-old guy, and he gets out there and
shows them how to do it right.
   He knew how to do it right—in all departments.




                                                                  229
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                KEEP LISTENING; KEEP
              LEARNING; KEEP TEACHING

              Denny Crum: UCLA varsity, 1958–59;
              assistant coach, 1969–71; three national
              championships

         Coach Wooden’s teaching was so effective because he was
         so well organized with his details. Everything was written
         out on the 3×5 cards and in notebooks: what was happen-
         ing from 3:07 to 3:11; what we’d do from 3:11 to 3:17;
         who was doing what when. Nothing was left to chance;
         every minute was accounted for—every single minute.
             And he was extremely disciplined in keeping to the
         schedule. I saw that when I was his assistant coach, and I
         saw it when I arrived at UCLA as a player. He taught details.
             On my ﬁrst day of practice, Coach Wooden sat us down
         and told the players to take off our sneakers and socks. He
         did the same. Then he went through his careful demonstra-
         tion showing us how to eliminate wrinkles, creases, and folds
         in our sweat socks. We’d usually wear two pair of socks, and
         he showed how to smooth them out one pair at a time; tuck
         ’em in from the toe on down, kind of squeeze out the wrin-
         kles and folds. Very precise. He wanted those socks to be
         smoothed out all the way up the calves.
             There were some funny looks around me, but Coach was
         not willing to take any chances on details he deemed impor-
         tant to performance. So he taught us how to do it right.


230
                                                         WOODEN’S TEAM




    That attention to detail was in everything he did—the
way he planned practice, ran practice, evaluated practice
and games. It applied to details of travel, equipment, and
food. Absolutely everything that could affect performance
got taken care of.
    Here’s something else that set him apart from 99 per-
cent of the other coaches: Coach Wooden never thought he
knew everything. In spite of the fact that he’d been winning
championships every year—four or ﬁve of them when I got
there as an assistant coach—he wanted to keeping learning,
improving as a coach and leader.
    I had spent a few years coaching at the junior college
level when I joined him as an assistant in 1968. I brought
with me some experience and my own ideas—which he wel-
comed. Those he liked we put in during practice. If they
worked, ﬁne. If not, we took it out.
    He never thought his way was the only way. He continued
like that right up to his ﬁnal game. We used to have disagree-
ments, really argue over things, and people would ask him
about it. Coach would say, “I don’t need ‘yes-men.’ If they’re
going to yes everything I do, I don’t need them around.”
    When I came up with an idea, he would never tell me,“Well,
this is the way we’ve always done it and we’re winning cham-
pionships. So, no, I’m not changing.” He was open to change.
    His approach was to listen; if he thought it made sense,
try it. If it works, great. If not, move on. He was always
searching for ways to improve.


                                                                   231
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             In the daily coaches’ meetings there was never an inter-
         ruption from outside. We would have out our notebooks,
         evaluate the previous day’s practice—what worked, what
         needed more work, what to do that was new. Adjustments
         and reﬁnements.
             Then we started formatting the practice minute to
         minute: a change-of-pace drill; change-of-direction drill; de-
         fensive sliding drill; reverse pivot on the dribble drill—on
         and on and on. We’d put it down in notebooks and on cards.
             But through it all there was a wide-open flow of ideas
         and opinions. He was open to suggestion and contrary
         thoughts, but he was tough. You had to know your stuff to
         convince him to change. He never did something on a whim.
         You had to have your reasons in place, but he’d let you have
         your say.
             Then, when everyone had had their say, he made the de-
         cision. And that was it.
             Coach Wooden never talked about the winning or the
         losing. It was never part of the conversation like you would
         think is normal. He wouldn’t come in before a game and
         say, “This team is tied with us in the conference, so we’ve
         got to step it up tonight. Let’s win this one.”
             He just wasn’t concerned about the opponents and
         what they might be up to—didn’t even scout most of them.
         His philosophy was to do what was necessary to make
         UCLA a better team. Teach it; practice it. The details and
         the fundamentals were his main concern.


232
                                                       WOODEN’S TEAM




   He just was completely absorbed in improvement for
our team without trying to always be adjusting to what an-
other team might be up to. “Let them adjust to us,” he said.
   Fundamentals, condition, play together as a team.
That’s all he did—simple as that. So simple.




                                                                 233
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                     A Cool Leader
                Pre vents Overheating

              Fred Slaughter: UCLA varsity, 1962–64;
              one national championship


         I think there were four or ﬁve games in my career at UCLA
         when we started out behind something like 18–2—just get-
         ting killed. I’d look over at Coach Wooden, and there he’d
         sit on the bench with his program rolled up in his hand—
         totally unaffected, almost like we were ahead. And I’d think
         to myself, “Hey, if he’s not worried, why should I be wor-
         ried? Let’s just do what the guy told us to do.”
             And you know what? We won all those games except
         one, and even that was close. It’s the doggonest experience
         to see that. He was cool when it counted; his conﬁdence and
         strength became ours. In my three years on the UCLA var-
         sity team, I never once saw him rattled.
             Coach Wooden dealt in the positive. He would not spend
         time on the negative—he was always focusing on moving
         forward with what we had to learn to make us better.
             He could sense when we might be thinking negatively,
         getting down on ourselves. Then he’d come in all positive:
         “This is what you guys are supposed to do. Follow this and
         we’ll be ﬁne.” No browbeating or yelling. And after a while
         we’d look back and, doggone, we were ﬁne. Coach Wooden




234
                                                         WOODEN’S TEAM




had his system, and he believed in it, and he taught us to be-
lieve in it.
    He’d keep telling us, “Focus on what I’m teaching. Don’t
focus on the score. Just do what you’re supposed to do and
things will work out fine. Just play as a team and we’ll be
ﬁne.” He was always supportive, even when he was correct-
ing something wrong.
    Most of all he taught us unity and oneness of purpose
in what we were doing, namely, working to be the very best
we could be—to perform our best out there on the court.
    And he understood how to get you to listen. When I ar-
rived at UCLA, I was shooting a fade-away jump shot, and
it was good. I used it in high school to become the number-
one high school player in Kansas. But Coach Wooden didn’t
like it. He told me, “Fred, you know what I want is when
you’re finished with the shot to be around the basket. We
need you to rebound. Now, if you fade away, you remove
yourself from rebounding.”
    But I loved that shot. I wouldn’t give it up until I heard
him say very calmly, “Fred, you can do it the way I am
teaching you or you can watch the game next Saturday sit-
ting next to me on the bench. Your replacement knows how
to shoot the jump shot correctly.”
    Oh my goodness, I’ve got to tell you, you don’t under-
stand the impact of that statement. And he didn’t have to
throw a chair across the ﬂoor to get his point across to me.




                                                                   235
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             We lost to Cincinnati in the semifinals of the national
         championship because of a bad charging call on us during
         the last minute of the game. It was a phantom call, and it
         cost UCLA the game and maybe the national championship.
         Coach’s reaction in the locker room was the same as if we’d
         won—cool. No complaining; he told us to keep our heads
         up: “Adversity makes us stronger.” And then he said, “Re-
         member, you’ve still got one another.”
             But he should have added, “and you’ve still got me.” He
         was part of us. He was out on the court with us even when
         he was sitting on the bench. And, he was right about adver-
         sity. It made us stronger. Two years later, UCLA won its ﬁrst
         NCAA national championship.




236
                                                       WOODEN’S TEAM




          Share the B all;
      Think be yond Yourself

     Gail Goodrich: UCLA varsity; 1963–65;
     two national championships


I came out of high school—LA Poly—as a guard who al-
ways thought in terms of having the ball. That’s how a
guard thinks: “Give me the ball so I can shoot.”
   Coach Wooden wanted me to think beyond just having
the ball because he had decided to install the Press—a full-
court defense. Of course, when you play defense, you don’t
have the ball. He was having a little trouble getting me to
change my thinking until one day Coach said, “Gail, the
game is 40 minutes long. The opponent has the ball approx-
imately half the time. That leaves us 20 minutes with the
basketball.
   “We have ﬁve players. In my system balance is impor-
tant, so each player should handle the ball about the same
amount of time. That means you will have the basketball
for approximately four minutes per game. Gail, what are
you going to do for the team during those other 35 minutes
when you do not have the ball?”
   It only took him about 15 seconds, but he dramatically
broadened my understanding of the role I needed to play on
the team. Coach used a variety of ways to teach what he
wanted you to learn. Sometimes during practice he would


                                                                 237
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         have the guards switch positions with the forwards—have
         us do the other guy’s job. He wanted everybody to under-
         stand the requirements of the player in the other positions.
         Coach Wooden wanted the guard to appreciate the chal-
         lenges a forward faced and the forward to appreciate what a
         guard had to deal with.
             He worked very hard to ﬁgure out ways to have us think
         like a team, to work as a unit, not every man out for him-
         self.
             I chose UCLA because of how he conducted practices (I
         had watched the Bruins at the Men’s Gym while I was in
         high school). I was so impressed by his control of the prac-
         tice, totally in charge.
             He had his 3×5 cards and notes and was always looking
         at the clock to stay on time. He went from one drill to an-
         other and then another and another—complete organiza-
         tion; no fooling around, no lulls. He was a master of using
         time efficiently. Coach could tell you exactly what he had
         done in practice on that same day 10 years earlier at 4:35 p.m.
             He believed that winning is a result of process, and he
         was a master of the process, of getting us to focus on what
         we were doing rather than the ﬁnal score. One drill he had
         was to run a play over and over at full speed, but he wouldn’t
         let us shoot the ball. He made us concentrate on what hap-
         pened before the shot was taken, what happened to make it
         possible. He made us focus on execution. He built teams
         that knew how to execute.


238
                                                       WOODEN’S TEAM




    You knew you were in trouble when you heard him say,
“Goodness gracious, sakes alive!” Big trouble. You knew
the hammer was heading your way when you heard that.
The hammer was the bench, or worse, the shower. Many
times he wouldn’t exactly tell you what you couldn’t do, but
he worked things so that it was hard to do them.
    Every year during football season there was a Cal Week-
end up at Berkeley when the Bruins played the Bears. Coach
didn’t want his players going up there because it was a big
party weekend. But instead of telling us we couldn’t go, he
just moved practice on Friday back to 6 p.m. Then he kept
us late and worked us so hard that nobody had the time or
energy to drive all night to get there.
    But one year John Galbraith and I decided to ﬂy up for
Cal Weekend. I was a Beta Theta Pi and had a couple of beers
at the fraternity party on Saturday night after the game.
Somehow, Coach Wooden found out not only that I went
up to Berkeley but that I’d had a few beers.
    Monday morning I got a call that he wanted to see me
in his ofﬁce. “Did you have fun this weekend?” he asked. I
nodded. “You know, Gail, if I ever see you drinking, you’re
gone.” I nodded, but I was in shock. “How does he know?
How did he ﬁnd out?” I was thinking.
    “Now, you’ve got a very good year coming up. You don’t
want to jeopardize that, do you? You don’t want to hurt the
team, do you?” I answered, “No, Coach. I don’t want to
hurt the team.”


                                                                 239
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             “Good. I’ll see you at practice.”
             The thing was, he wouldn’t try and catch you doing
         something wrong like having a beer. That wasn’t his style.
         He wanted you to assume responsibility for your actions, to
         have self-control. The whole point of that conversation on
         Monday was to make me think about what choices I was
         making. And I did.
             He always talked about balance: body balance, scoring
         balance, team balance, and most of all, mental and emo-
         tional balance. Your feet have to be in balance. Your body
         has to be in balance over your feet. Your head needs to be
         in balance with your body and your arms. He said if you’re
         not in balance, you’ll eventually fall over, and he meant it in
         more ways than one.
             I came to see balance as one of the keys to success, not
         only in basketball, but in life. When things get out of bal-
         ance, it’s generally not good. Everything needs balance.
         That one word he kept drilling at us—balance—has stuck
         with me, became important in how I try to do things.
             He never talked about winning, even in the locker room
         just before the first national championship game against
         Duke. He calmly went through our game plan and said if
         we played a good 94-foot game, meaning execution of the
         Press at one end of the court and good play making at the
         other end, we’d be able to come back in the locker room af-
         terward with our heads held high. Never mentioned win-
         ning a championship or winning the game.


240
                                                       WOODEN’S TEAM




    But then, just before we went out on the court, he asked
us, “Does anybody here remember who was the runner-up
in last year’s national championship?”
    Nobody raised his hand. That’s as close as he ever got
to a pep talk.




                                                                 241
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                          De tails on
                         the First Day

              Lynn Shackleford: UCLA varsity, 1967–69;
              three national championships


         The very ﬁrst team meeting I ever attended at UCLA was a
         shock. Sitting next to me was another freshman—the guy
         who had been the most coveted high school player in Amer-
         ica, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar (Lewis Alcindor, Jr.).
             Scattered around us were our freshman teammates—
         some of the best in the country—as well as the returning
         members of UCLA’s varsity team that had won the NCAA
         national championship several months earlier—Edgar
         Lacey, Kenny Washington, Doug McIntosh, Fred Goss,
         Mike Lynn, and others.
             There was a lot of energy and talent in that room wait-
         ing for the arrival of Coach Wooden and his words of wis-
         dom. Pretty soon he walked in and went directly to the front
         of the classroom in which we had gathered. Finally, the big
         moment had arrived, my ﬁrst experience as a member of a
         UCLA team—reigning national champions!—coached by
         the famous John Wooden.
             He looked at us for a moment and began his remarks.
         And that’s what was shocking: “Gentlemen,” he said, “Wel-
         come. Let’s get down to business. I want to remind each one
         of you of a few important rules we have here at UCLA.


242
                                                          WOODEN’S TEAM




Number one: Keep your ﬁngernails trimmed. Number two:
Keep your hair short. Number three: Keep your jersey
tucked into your trunks at all times.” He looked around the
room for a moment and then added solemnly: “Am I clear?”
    I wondered, “Is he making a joke?” But there was no
laughter, not even smiles, from any of the varsity players.
They knew better. Nevertheless, I couldn’t understand why
he was wasting his time on stuff like that.
    As the months—eventually years (and three more na-
tional championships)—went by, I came to recognize that
“stuff like that” was part of the genius in his leadership.
There was logic to every move. Details of ﬁngernails, hair,
and jerseys led to details of running plays, handling the ball,
and everything else—hundreds of small things done right.
    Everything was related to everything else; nothing was
left to chance; it all had to be done well. Sloppiness was not
allowed in anything, not in passing, shooting, or trimming
your ﬁngernails and tucking in your jersey.
    Coach Wooden taught that great things can only be ac-
complished by doing the little things right. Doing things
right became a habit with us.
    He kept it simple. What’s more simple than short hair?
What’s more simple than squaring up for a shot? All these
simple little things added up—one at a time—to an enor-
mous amount of information that he presented in a plain
and direct way, bit by bit. Ultimately, he and the team put it
all together in practice and then in games.


                                                                    243
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             To accomplish this, he thought out his lesson plan for
         each day’s practice with great precision. He knew what he
         wanted to accomplish and how to do it. Part of his effective-
         ness may have come from the fact that he has a master’s de-
         gree in English. He could say in one short sentence what it
         took others a long time to get out. He could communicate so
         much so fast—no wasted words, no beating around the bush.
             Coach Wooden’s practices were very businesslike and
         his presence very strong. There were times when he got to a
         level of sternness mixed with some anger that was nothing
         to fool with. There was never any screaming or yelling, but
         his intensity was something else. Especially when he thought
         we weren’t giving it our best effort—watch out then.
             During a game against Cal (University of California,
         Berkeley), we went to the locker room at halftime with a
         lead, but he was very unhappy. The score didn’t matter. He
         felt that we weren’t playing with intensity. And he gave us a
         tongue-lashing that I still remember well. And he did so
         without screaming or shouting.
             The fact that we were ahead was incidental. What mat-
         tered to him was that we weren’t playing to our potential.
         And, it worked the other way too. If the score was going
         against us, but we were giving it our best effort, he wouldn’t
         get upset. Instead, Coach would very calmly instruct us on
         changes that should be made.
             In 1968, number-one-ranked UCLA played number-
         two-ranked Houston in the Astrodome. It was called the


244
                                                          WOODEN’S TEAM




Game of the Century. The Cougars were undefeated on the
year, and UCLA had a 47-game winning streak going.
    It was the ﬁrst regular-season game ever seen on national
television, the ﬁrst ever played in the Astrodome, and the ﬁrst
to have attendance of over 50,000. It was a big deal. Nobody
had ever seen anything like it before in college basketball.
    UCLA lost in the ﬁnal seconds, 71–69, and our 47-game
winning streak came to an end. After the game, in the locker
room, all the Bruins were very interested to see Coach
Wooden’s reaction. As UCLA players, we had never seen
him lose a single game. Suddenly, he had lost, and it was a
big game. How would he react?
    When Coach walked into the locker room after losing
the Game of the Century, he was very even keeled. There
was even a slight smile on his face. He told us, “It’s not the
end of the world. We’ll do better next time.” He was pleased
with our effort. The score was secondary; having our win-
ning streak snapped was not his concern. Our effort on the
court had been total. That made him happy.
    In 1967, UCLA played in the ﬁnals of the NCAA tour-
nament in Louisville. We hadn’t lost a game all season. Just
before we went on the court to play Dayton for the national
championship, the whole team sat in the locker room for
Coach Wooden’s pregame talk. Four of the starters were
ﬁrst-year varsity players who were about to face their ﬁrst
national championship game in a few minutes—Kareem,
Lucius Allen, Kenny Heitz, and me.


                                                                    245
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             Coach Wooden walked up to the chalkboard and began
         to diagram something, maybe a new play or defensive tac-
         tic. But it wasn’t. Coach was diagramming where we should
         stand during the national anthem! He then spoke about our
         conduct following the game. The day before, players on an-
         other team had gotten rowdy, and he cautioned us about be-
         having badly. He never mentioned anything about the
         opponent we were going to play for the national champi-
         onship; no plays, no speciﬁcs of the game. None of that.
             What this was about, of course, was his belief that by
         game time his teaching was complete; if he hadn’t taught us
         what we needed to know by then, it was too late.
             Of course, he had taught us what we needed to know.
         And it started on the very ﬁrst day when he walked to the
         front of the class and said to the freshman and returning
         varsity players, “Gentlemen, let’s get right down to busi-
         ness.” And then he told us about ﬁngernails, short hair, and
         tucking in jerseys.
             It’s still a little shocking when I think about it.




246
                                                        WOODEN’S TEAM




               Flexibility in
              Enforcing Rules

     Bill Hicks: UCLA varsity, 1960–62

One of our top players—maybe our best—got upset about
something during practice one day and stormed off the
court. This put Coach Wooden in an awkward position be-
cause he didn’t want to lose the guy. We didn’t exactly have
a lot of talent to spare.
    Coach solved the problem by telling the player who had
blown up and walked off the court that he was suspended.
However, he then informed the suspended player that our
whole team would be allowed to vote on whether or not to
let him return. This allowed everybody to save face. It also
empowered the team, because it felt like we got in on the de-
cision. Of course, we voted to let him back.
    Coach had solved his problem, disciplined the player,
and strengthened our team all at the same time. This was
typical of his leadership—very innovative.
    He treated all the players the same—no favorites—but
said he was only human and would probably like some of
us more than others. However, he promised to be absolutely
fair in his evaluation of us as players. Coach Wooden
wanted us to know that there would be no favoritism on his
part. We all had an equal chance.




                                                                  247
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             Coach Wooden always had a passion for the little
         things. He wanted us to tie our shoes the correct way, pivot
         the correct way. There was a correct way to do everything,
         and he wanted us to know how.
             So he taught us how.




248
                                                         WOODEN’S TEAM




                 The Power of
                  Potential

     Doug McIntosh: UCLA varsity, 1964–66;
     two national championships


“You can always do more than you think you can.” That’s
the biggest thing I got from Coach Wooden’s teaching. There’s
always more inside if you’re willing to work hard enough to
bring it out.
    Most of the time we don’t recognize we have great po-
tential inside. Coach brought out the potential in people. He
taught mental readiness: “Be ready and your chance may
come. If you’re not ready, it may not come again.”
    Thus, he made me see that there are no small opportuni-
ties. Every opportunity is big. If you play for only two min-
utes, make it the best two minutes possible. That’s your
opportunity, whether in basketball or in life. Be ready; make
the most of it. It may not come again.
    In 1964 I was on the UCLA bench at the start of 29 con-
secutive games. The thirtieth game was against Duke for the
national championship. When it started, I was on the bench
just like the previous 29 games. And I was ready. Everybody
on Coach Wooden’s bench was ready.
    Five minutes into the championship game, Coach gave
me an opportunity. I went in at center, replacing Fred
Slaughter, who’d gotten off to a slow start. I stayed in until


                                                                   249
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         the game was decided and UCLA had won its ﬁrst national
         championship.
             The next year, 1965, UCLA played Michigan in the
         championship game. This time I wasn’t on the bench. I was a
         starter, and I played the best 10 minutes of basketball I’d
         ever played—running up and down the court blocking shots
         and getting rebounds. Then Coach took me out for a
         breather and put in Mike Lynn.
             Mike played out of his mind—brilliantly. I spent most
         of the rest of the game on the bench. Mike was ready when
         his opportunity came, just as I had been the previous year.
         Either way was ﬁne with me, if it was good for the team.
             The year before, Fred Slaughter was OK with me com-
         ing in and replacing him. Fred also believed that what was
         best for the team was best for him.
             Where’d we get that concept? Coach Wooden. He taught
         that across the board to everybody. There’s always resent-
         ment by some guys who want more playing time, a bigger
         role, but Coach was very effective in getting people to un-
         derstand that the team’s interests came ﬁrst, that doing what
         was best for the team—even if it meant sitting on the
         bench—was best for us. Now that’s a tough lesson to teach.
         But he did it.
             At UCLA we had ﬁve guys on the court playing basket-
         ball and seven guys on the sidelines forming a cheerleading
         squad. When I was on the bench, I was a cheerleader, and I




250
                                                         WOODEN’S TEAM




felt that it mattered; I needed to be a great cheerleader, be-
cause it could help our team.
    In 1966, after UCLA won two consecutive national
championships, many picked the Bruins to win a third. We
didn’t, mainly because of injuries. Through it all, Coach
Wooden wasn’t any different from the year before, when
UCLA won a championship, and the year before that,
when UCLA won its ﬁrst title.
    He didn’t turn into a raving maniac when we started
losing games. His demeanor was about the same, champi-
onship season or not. No “woe is me”; never a word about
bad breaks and injuries.
    He built great teams in practice. He was a “practice
coach,” and he conducted practices at a very high level.
How you practice is how you play is what he believed.
    He was strict, but there was no sense of fear of him by
players. We knew there was nothing personal in his criticism
or comments. What he did was always for the common
good and welfare of the team. We all knew that and wanted
the same.
    He taught that discipline is the mark of a good team.
And Coach Wooden was disciplined. And part of that
meant keeping emotions under control.
    I don’t know that there was a “secret” to his success. It
was just those three things he stressed: fundamentals, condi-
tion, and team spirit.




                                                                   251
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             The drills he ran at UCLA were mostly the same drills I
         had run back in high school—the very same drills. Coach
         Wooden just did them more repetitively and with more
         speed and precision. He just demanded a higher level of ex-
         ecution when it came to fundamentals. There was no secret
         formula.
             He was very intense, but not to the point of screaming
         or pulling out his hair. Coach was digniﬁed and didn’t let his
         emotions show very much. But we all knew what was going
         on in his mind.
             He kept those emotions under control, but sometimes
         it was right on the edge. The maddest I ever saw him was
         against Oregon State, when I went up high for a basket and
         my legs got cut out from under me. I hit the ﬂoor and was
         knocked unconscious. When I woke up, I saw Coach stand-
         ing there absolutely livid and demanding that the referee
         throw out the Oregon State player for the cheap shot.
             And he wouldn’t tolerate cheap shots by us either—no
         dirty play. If one of his players threw an elbow in anger, he’d
         pull you and put you on the bench. Then, when it was con-
         venient, he’d let you have it real good.
             He was more upset that we’d lost our temper than any-
         thing else. He absolutely wanted emotions to be controlled.
         If you lost it out there, he’d make you pay a price. He knew
         that when you lost it—when emotions took over—your per-
         formance suffered, your potential was locked inside. He
         wanted that potential out where it could help the team.


252
                                                          WOODEN’S TEAM




         Be Willing to Change

     Gary Cunningham: UCLA varsity, 1960–62;
     assistant coach, 1966–75;
     six national championships

Coach Wooden was strongly opposed, in principle, to the
3–2 zone defense—a half-court defensive system. Neverthe-
less, Denny Crum and I, assistant coaches, thought it could
be very effective for the Bruins to install it. We recommended
that he make the change.
    Keep in mind, at this point Coach Wooden’s teams had
just won ﬁve national championships in six years. He could
easily have told us, “If it ain’t broke, don’t ﬁx it.” However,
Coach was always willing to listen, to evaluate new ideas,
to seek ways to improve our team. He was never satisﬁed—
never satisﬁed.
    So, despite the fact that UCLA was undefeated at that
point in the season, 20–0, Denny and I convinced him to in-
stall the 3–2 zone defense for a series up at Oregon.
    UCLA won the ﬁrst game against the University of Ore-
gon, 75–58, but the next night, using the same 3–2 zone
against Oregon State, we got beaten, 78–65, and it was ap-
parent the new system wasn’t all we thought it might be.
    That was the last time we brought up the 3–2 zone de-
fense.
    But Coach Wooden had listened and given it—and us—
a chance. He wasn’t afraid to make a change. And when it


                                                                    253
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         didn’t work, there were no recriminations. He moved on
         without making us feel we had led him down the wrong path.
             He did not want “yes-men” around him. We were en-
         couraged to argue our points, knowing he’d come back at
         us strong with his own opinions. That was his way of test-
         ing how much we believed in what we were telling him and
         how much we knew about it.
             For example, we’d debate the pivot—what was the best
         way to do it—for 45 minutes during a morning meeting. But
         he listened with an open mind, let us contribute—insisted
         on it. During those meetings, we didn’t just sit and take
         notes. He wanted interaction, ideas back and forth. And he
         got it. And, of course, he taught us to pay attention and
         teach details—the little things, like the correct way to pivot.
             Those little things that got a lot of attention are one of
         the secrets to his great strength, namely, organization. We
         planned practices down to the exact minute.
             He had us address the team before games and made sure
         the assistant coaches talked to the players in the huddle dur-
         ing time-outs. He was very inclusive and gave us both au-
         thority and respect.
             When we fouled up, he never criticized us in front of the
         team, nor would he allow the players to challenge us. He in-
         sisted on having them address us as Coach Cunningham or
         Coach Crum rather than by a nickname or informally as
         Gary or Denny.




254
                                                           WOODEN’S TEAM




    In the locker room talks, there was no yelling, no pound-
ing on the wall. It was focused and intense, and always at
the end he’d say: “Now go out there and do your best so
you can come back in here with your heads up. Let’s make
sure you can do that.”
    He was very efﬁcient in his teaching and kept it simple—
broke it down into parts, taught each part, then built the
whole back up. Always he used the laws of learning: expla-
nation, demonstration, imitation, and repetition. Lots of
repetition. You can’t believe the repetition.
    Coach Wooden didn’t believe in lengthy discussions. He
was very succinct, clear, substantive. When I first started
with him as an assistant, if I took more than 10 seconds to
say something during practice, he’d say, “C’mon, let’s get go-
ing. C’mon.” Not rude, just a great sense of urgency.
    I learned to keep it short and say it right. Every word
counted, because he believed every minute mattered.
    The way he conducted himself embodied the Pyramid.
It wasn’t until later that I realized he was teaching the Pyra-
mid all the time with the model of his behavior.
    Teamwork was so important. He kept saying that it
doesn’t matter who gets credit. If we play together as a team,
each player doing his job, we’ll like the results. We’ll all get
credit.
    He was prepared, and he got us prepared. People can
see when you’re not prepared. UCLA was always prepared.




                                                                     255
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             Coach Wooden was an intense competitor and loved to
         win. But, win or lose, it was always on an even keel. He did-
         n’t want us to get too excited about winning, even if it was a
         national championship.
             He was a strong disciplinarian, but he demanded disci-
         pline in a very controlled way. “Goodness gracious sakes”
         was real angry for him. He was a master at analyzing per-
         sonalities. Player A might just need an explanation. Player
         B might need some push. He knew what everybody needed
         to learn his lessons, and he supplied it.
             Like with Sidney Wicks. Sidney loved the practices, so
         the worst possible thing he could do to Sidney was say, “Sid-
         ney, you’re not with it today. Take a shower.” No scream-
         ing, yelling. That was it, “Take a shower.”
             He kept it simple—but intense; not emotional, just very
         intense.




256
                                                           WOODEN’S TEAM




                Win, win, win?
                 No, no, no.

     Dave Meyers: UCLA varsity; 1973–75;
     two national championships


I retired from the pros when I was 26 after being drafted by
Los Angeles as part of a trade that sent me to Milwaukee.
On the first day of practice there, I think I heard the “F”
word 150 times. Quite a change from Coach Wooden. But
that wasn’t the only change—just the most inconsequential.
    As a pro, absolutely nothing else mattered but winning.
If you missed a shot or made a mistake, you were made to
feel so bad about it because all eyes were on the scoreboard.
Winning was all that mattered and all anybody talked
about: “We’ve gotta win this game,” or “We shoulda won
that game,” or “How can we win the next game?” Win.
Win. Win.
    Coach Wooden didn’t talk about winning—ever. His
message was to give the game the best you’ve got. “That’s
the goal,” he would tell us. “Do that and you should be
happy. If enough of you do it, our team will be a success.”
He teaches this, he believes it, and he taught me to believe it.
    Winning was not mentioned, ever—only the effort, the
preparation, doing what it takes to bring out our best in
practice and games. Let winning take care of itself.




                                                                     257
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             When I was a senior playing forward at UCLA, none of
         the experts really thought we’d do much. The Walton Gang—
         Bill Walton, Keith Wilkes, and others—had just graduated
         after winning two national championships and extending a
         streak that got up to 88 straight victories before a loss to
         Notre Dame. I was the only returning starter on the 1974–
         1975 Bruins.
             Coach went to work with us—fundamentals, drills,
         teamwork, self-sacriﬁce. Play hard, don’t get down, wait for
         your chance, try to improve each day. Don’t worry about
         the scoreboard. Never a single word about winning. We
         won the national championship that year.
             At the time I didn’t quite see it, but his behavior was ba-
         sically the Pyramid of Success—hard work, energy and en-
         thusiasm, self-control, and the rest of it. That’s him. And he
         taught it by being himself.
             In fact, I kind of thought of him as a professor. When I
         interviewed with him while I was in high school at Sonora,
         California, I remember, his office at UCLA was full of
         books, memorabilia, papers, plaques, certificates, lots of
         stuff. It seemed like the ofﬁce of an English professor.
             On the wall he had pictures of his own coaches—“Piggy”
         Lambert at Purdue, Glenn Curtis at Martinsville High School,
         and Earl Warriner from his grade school days in Centerton.
         There was a large drawing of his Pyramid of Success next to
         them.




258
                                                     WOODEN’S TEAM




   Before practice, he’d often be standing there as we
walked on to the court: “How’s your mother, David? Have
you called her?” “You over that cold, Jim?” “How’s the
math class coming?” He knew us as people. You could tell
he cared. And you could tell that he really knew how to
teach—just like a professor.
   And, in a certain kind of way he was a professor. What
he taught was how to win. And he did it without ever once
mentioning winning.




                                                               259
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                           The Fickle
                         Finger of Fate

              Ken Washington: UCLA varsity, 1964–66;
              two national championships


         The great lesson I take from Coach Wooden is this: the best
         thing you can do in life is your best. You’re a winner when
         you do that, even if you’re on the short end of the score.
             Too many factors can affect the ﬁnal results; the ﬁckle
         ﬁnger of fate can suddenly take over. The best talent doesn’t
         always win, but the individual or team that goes out and
         does their best is a winner. That’s his philosophy. It’s what
         he teaches.
             We had a perfect season and won the national champi-
         onship in 1964. We repeated as national champions in
         1965. There was no question in my mind that in 1966 we
         could become the ﬁrst team in college basketball history to
         win three championships in a row. Then the ﬁckle ﬁnger of
         fate pointed at us.
             Injuries, sickness, and all kinds of stuff were hitting us.
         We didn’t even win our conference title in 1966—we had a
         10–4 record and weren’t even eligible to play in the NCAA
         tournament and defend our title.
             Through all the misfortune, I never heard a single com-
         plaint or excuse from Coach Wooden. He fought hard and




260
                                                        WOODEN’S TEAM




kept telling us to keep working, never give up, and do our
best. And we did in spite of the ﬁckle ﬁnger of fate.
    We were winners in 1966 because of that.
    In retrospect, I believe it was probably fantastic for me
as a person that we didn’t win that third consecutive na-
tional championship. It showed me what life is really like,
what fate can do—why you can’t base your success just on
results.
    Of course, this is what I had been taught by my coach.
More than anyone I’ve ever known, he comes closest to
practicing what he preaches. He was so consistent in what
he said and did in both principles and standards. In fact, I
began to think it was normal behavior in a leader. But it’s
not normal. Holding to those high standards and principles
is rare out in the world.
    At the end of my four years at UCLA, I still needed addi-
tional credits to graduate. Coach Wooden was all over me
to make sure I came back for that ﬁfth year to earn my de-
gree in Economics.
    Even though my playing days were over at UCLA, he
cared a great deal about my welfare. “This is very impor-
tant for you, Kenneth. Let’s get that diploma.” And he kept
checking in on me during the year to make sure I got it. And
I did.
    Coach Wooden didn’t teach character; he nurtured it.
He chose individuals to be on the team based on talent, of




                                                                  261
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         course, but not talent alone. He wanted a certain kind of in-
         dividual—the team player, a person with integrity and values.
             Then he nurtured those values just like he nurtured your
         talent as an athlete. Honesty, being unselﬁsh, caring about
         your teammates, a good work ethic, all these things were
         stressed constantly.
             Along with this, he would never degrade, abuse, or hu-
         miliate individuals, even though he had the power to do it.
         After all, he was the boss. But he gave respect even when
         discipline was doled out.
             Coach is a master psychologist who understands the dif-
         ferences in people. Certain things he insisted on, like no
         swearing, being on time, no showboating, all of that. But
         when it came to working with us, he treated everybody as
         an individual, approached each of us in a way that worked.
             Jack Hirsch, for example, was a free spirit, very ﬂippant,
         and the only guy on the team who addressed Coach Wooden
         as John. Coach understood that it was not being done in a
         disrespectful manner and let him do it. Coach knew Jack
         wasn’t crossing the line. It was just Jack being Jack.
             When he crossed the line, however, there was a price to
         pay. One day we were eating dinner at the training table and
         Jack got up and said, “I can’t eat this slop.” Coach very
         calmly, but firmly, suspended Jack—told him not to come
         back until he could apologize as well as eat what all the
         other players were eating.




262
                                                          WOODEN’S TEAM




    Coach understood the disrespect that was carried in
Jack’s remarks about our food. Disrespect by anyone for
anyone was simply not allowed.
    Now, where Jack came from, maybe our training table
food didn’t taste good. As far I was concerned, it was ﬁne.
Coach understood he could not let Jack say what he said. It
was not acceptable, disrespectful. Jack remained off the
team until he changed his attitude and apologized.
    Two weeks later Jack was back at the training table, not
exactly wolﬁng it down, but not complaining either.
    Athletics is like life. Sometime you can do everything
right and still lose. It’s all a journey. You do your best, and
then you have to let it go. Lots of people preach that, but
come crunch time—oops, not so easy to do. Coach prac-
ticed what he preached. Even when the ﬁckle ﬁnger of fate
took over.




                                                                    263
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                   EMOTIONs cAN M AKE
                     YOU VULNERABLE

              Kareem Abdul-Jabbar
              (Lewis Alcindor, Jr.)
              UCLA varsity, 1967–69
              three national championships

         His approach was very dispassionate. He taught that big
         emotions were an extra burden that we didn’t need to con-
         tend with. Coach Wooden felt that if you needed all kinds
         of emotion to do your job, then you were vulnerable. There
         was never any “You gotta go out and kill these guys” talk
         from Coach Wooden to get us keyed up. He’d say, “I want
         you to go out there and do your best the way we practiced
         it.” There was never any speech telling us to go out and
         “win this game!” to get us charged up, no [emotional] juice
         he tried to put in the mix. We understood that if we played
         up to the standard he had set in practice, we’d probably
         win. If not, if we lost, he took the blame and tried to ﬁx it
         the next practice. He was very focused, very intense. Al-
         ways, always with his emotions under control.




264
                                                         WOODEN’S TEAM




                   Work Hard
                    or Leave

     Dave Meyers
     UCLA varsity, 1973–75


He loved sharpness. If Coach Wooden didn’t see it in prac-
tice, that intensity of attention and execution—the effort—
he might say very coldly, “O.K., we’re through today. You
didn’t come here to work.” Marques Johnson or one of us
would say, “No, no, no. We’ll get it going. C’mon, we’ll get
it going.” Almost pleading with him to give us another
chance to work harder.
    Maybe his Midwestern upbringing, that lifestyle, put a
love of hard work into him. Coach Wooden loved hard
work. He wanted to see it from the players. If not, no yelling
or screaming, he’d just threaten to end practice. And he
wasn’t afraid to follow through on the threat.




                                                                   265
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                I Learn Who’s The Star

              Andre McCarter
              UCLA varsity, 1974–76


         As a high school player in South Philly at Overbrook High
         School, I won every honor you could get: MVP, Player of
         the Year, High School All-American as a junior and senior,
         and lots of attention. Colleges were promising me things
         you couldn’t believe.
             Then I talked to Coach Wooden on a trip to California.
         He was strictly no frills. He didn’t promise me I’d start or
         anything like that. He promised me only one thing, speciﬁ-
         cally, that I’d get a very good education with my athletic
         scholarship—that and a $20 laundry expense.
             If I wanted to be “the star,” I knew I had to go some-
         place else. At UCLA the star was Coach Wooden’s team.
         That was his system. The team was the star.




266
                                                       WOODEN’S TEAM




          Detailed Preparation
             and Training

        Ray Regan
        South Bend Central High School varsity,
        1938–39; lawyer

Coach Wooden always carried a No. 2 yellow pencil. It
seemed like the only time he didn’t have his No. 2 yellow
pencil in his hand was when he was holding a basketball.
    He wrote everything down, kept track of all kinds of
stuff during practice and games. Coach Wooden was amaz-
ing when it came to keeping records of our statistics and
then training us to improve on them. I still remember that
No. 2 yellow pencil.
    I also remember we used to have a showboat on our
team, a player who was always yelling for the ball, and then
once he got it would keep it until he took a shot. Then he’d
start yelling for the ball again.
    One day, during a ﬁve-on-ﬁve scrimmage, Coach Wooden
decided to teach the showboat a lesson about teamwork.
Coach took the four of us aside and said to pass the basket-
ball to our teammate the ball hog. Then we were told to run
immediately to the middle of the court, all four of us, sit
down, and let the showboat play the other team all by him-
self.
    It was Coach’s way of showing this guy that everybody
helps everybody or nothing gets done.


                                                                 267
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             After that little lesson in sharing, the showboat started
         passing more often. It was a great way of teaching a lesson
         that is hard for some people to learn. And Coach did it many
         different ways.
             His strength was in teaching fundamentals through hard
         work. Nobody raced to the showers when practice was over.
         Most of us just sat on the bench in the locker room com-
         pletely whipped—exhausted. Occasionally, the custodian
         would even come by and plead with us, “C’mon, guys, I
         want to get home for dinner. Take your showers!” Coach
         worked us hard.
             We used to pray for the game to come because practices
         were so demanding. But it paid off. In 1939 we were 18–2
         overall and favored to win the Indiana State High School
         tournament. Unfortunately, it wasn’t meant to be. Just be-
         fore the Sectionals began, the ﬂu hit everybody on our team.
         We didn’t stand a chance. The Bears lost to our archrivals
         Mishawaka.
             Afterward, Coach Wooden said he was proud of us,
         how we gave it everything we had, that we could hold our
         heads high. There was disappointment in our locker room,
         but I don’t believe any player felt like a loser. We had given
         it our best.
             Beyond teaching fundamentals, Coach Wooden was
         aiming at something else.
             When the players got rambunctious, a little out of hand,
         started acting like teenagers, he’d stop everything and say


268
                                                      WOODEN’S TEAM




very strongly, “Fellas, I want you to become men, not just
beat somebody in basketball.” And he really meant it. His
teaching went beyond just trying to win.
   Before games he told us to do our best, never harbor ill
feelings if we lost, never denigrate our opponent, and, if
they played well, to congratulate them. And, of course, no
profanity.
   His morality—that basic decency he has—affected me
deeply. He was a gentle man who was a very strong coach.
   I came away from him with a feeling of wanting to do my
best in whatever I took on. We were prepared and trained
well. And not just for basketball.




                                                                269
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




                         A Genius for
                        Knowing What
                        M akes You Tick

              Keith Erickson
              UCLA varsity, 1963–65,
              two national championships


         What made Coach Wooden so effective as a leader was his
         ability to work with every type of person—different tem-
         peraments, personalities, styles, and all the rest. He knew
         how to get them to do it his way, and this included people
         who were total opposites.
             UCLA’s Gail Goodrich and Walt Hazzard were the
         greatest combination of guards in the history of college bas-
         ketball; the best twosome ever, in my opinion. But they were
         totally different guys.
             With Gail, Coach would come up and sort of cajole him,
         put his arm around him and low-key it—offer a quiet sug-
         gestion, a little compliment. Then he’d give him a pat on the
         back and walk away. He knew that Gail wouldn’t react to
         sharp criticism; it would hurt his play.
             Coach knew a stronger approach worked with Walt.
         There was no mincing words. He’d say very ﬁrmly, “Walt, if
         you do that again, you’re out of here.” And if Walt did it
         again, he’d hear Coach say, “O.K., that’s it. Take a shower.”
         Not with any anger, just very stern.


270
                                                         WOODEN’S TEAM




    He was so smart in administering discipline, avoiding
backing himself into a corner. So with Walt, he’d say, “If
you do that again. . . .” He didn’t want Walt taking a shower
before practice was concluded, so he gave him a chance or
two to correct the problem. Walt knew he could get away
with a little, but not much.
    Coach treated each one of us the way we needed to be
treated, the way that worked best for each person. Coach
believed or understood that no two of us were alike. His un-
derstanding of people and how to work with each player in-
dividually was evident in practice every day. With me there
was no cajoling. He knew a sharp remark would have a
positive effect. And I got ’em.
    Always Coach Wooden emphasized playing together as
a team, a unit, a single group. That was all-important, every-
thing.
    Our team in 1964—the one that won a national
championship—wasn’t buddy-buddy off the court, but on
the court you’d think we loved each other because there was
such camaraderie and selﬂessness.
    Coach Wooden acted as a scoutmaster, den mother, sur-
rogate parent, second father, drill sergeant—and a man. He
was tough as nails, and yet he showed this great love for his
wife and kids—his family. To have a coach who was so
tough—strong—who loved his wife so much . . . well, it af-
fected my thinking of him. It really brought out respect. He
got this great respect from us. And he gave it back.


                                                                   271
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




             We got treated like part of the family. Kenny Washing-
         ton, whose own family lived on the other side of the coun-
         try, was invited over to the Woodens for holiday dinners so
         he wouldn’t be alone. And there were others.
             John Wooden knew what worked for each one of us. He
         understood what made us tick.




272
                                                          WOODEN’S TEAM




         It ’s What You Learn
        after You Know It All
              That Counts

     Bill Walton
     UCLA varsity, 1972–74,
     two national championships

I stopped listening to Coach Wooden in my senior year, 1974.
All the things that made us a great team as sophomores and
juniors evaporated like dust in the wind. It was after this de-
pressing meltdown [UCLA’s 88-game winning streak was
broken, and the team lost in the semiﬁnals of the Final Four,
which ended the winning streak of seven consecutive cham-
pionships] that Coach penned his famous maxim, “It’s what
you learn after you know it all that counts.” This prophetic
lesson of life was directed speciﬁcally to me. I now have the
original sitting as the centerpiece on my desk, personally
signed by the master teacher himself. And I can see him this
very moment slowly shaking his head with that sad, disap-
pointed look on his face—like a father who’s been let down.




                                                                    273
This page intentionally left blank
About Steve Jamison



                Steve Jamison understands
      what I did and why I did it. Equally important,
         he has a terriﬁc ability to articulate both.
                      —John Wooden


Steve Jamison is America’s foremost author and authority on
the leadership philosophy and methodology created by Coach
John Wooden. For more than a decade, he and Mr. Wooden
have collaborated in bringing the legendary coach’s leader-
ship ideas to a vast audience. Together they have authored
ﬁve best-selling books, including Wooden
on Leadership (McGraw-Hill), The Essen-
tial Wooden (McGraw-Hill), My Personal
Best: Life Lessons from an All American
Journey (McGraw-Hill), and Wooden: A
Lifetime of Observations and Reﬂections
(Contemporary Publishing). Their book
for children, Inch and Miles: The Journey to Success (Perfec-
tion Learning), is being read in grade schools across America.
    Mr. Jamison is executive producer of the award-winning
PBS presentation, “WOODEN: Values, Victory, and Peace of


                                                                 275
COACH WOODEN’S LEADERSHIP GAME PLAN FOR SUCCESS




         Mind” and has appeared with Mr. Wooden at numerous
         corporate presentations, including Disney Resorts, General
         Mills, CitiBank, Waste Connections, Inc., and UCLA’s An-
         derson School of Management. He serves as a consultant to
         the UCLA Anderson School of Management’s John Wooden
         Global Leadership Program and is a popular public speaker.
             Additionally, he is executive producer of John Wooden
         Leadership, a teaching forum dedicated to sharing the lead-
         ership philosophy and methodology of Coach Wooden. Mr.
         Jamison is creative director of CoachWooden.com, the of-
         ﬁcial Web site of John Wooden. For more visit www.Steve
         Jamison.com




276
